
{The famous race of Spear-Danes.}

          Lo! the Spear-Danes' glory through splendid achievements
          The folk-kings' former fame we have heard of,
          How princes displayed then their prowess-in-battle.

{Scyld, their mighty king, in honor of whom they are often called
Scyldings. He is the great-grandfather of Hrothgar, so prominent in the
poem.}

          Oft Scyld the Scefing from scathers in numbers
        5 From many a people their mead-benches tore.
          Since first he found him friendless and wretched,
          The earl had had terror: comfort he got for it,
          Waxed 'neath the welkin, world-honor gained,
          Till all his neighbors o'er sea were compelled to
       10 Bow to his bidding and bring him their tribute:
          An excellent atheling! After was borne him

{A son is born to him, who receives the name of Beowulf--a name afterwards
made so famous by the hero of the poem.}

          A son and heir, young in his dwelling,
          Whom God-Father sent to solace the people.
          He had marked the misery malice had caused them,
       15 [1]That reaved of their rulers they wretched had erstwhile[2]
          Long been afflicted. The Lord, in requital,
          Wielder of Glory, with world-honor blessed him.
          Famed was Beowulf, far spread the glory
          Of Scyld's great son in the lands of the Danemen.

[2]

{The ideal Teutonic king lavishes gifts on his vassals.}

       20 So the carle that is young, by kindnesses rendered
          The friends of his father, with fees in abundance
          Must be able to earn that when age approacheth
          Eager companions aid him requitingly,
          When war assaults him serve him as liegemen:
       25 By praise-worthy actions must honor be got
          'Mong all of the races. At the hour that was fated

{Scyld dies at the hour appointed by Fate.}

          Scyld then departed to the All-Father's keeping
          Warlike to wend him; away then they bare him
          To the flood of the current, his fond-loving comrades,
       30 As himself he had bidden, while the friend of the Scyldings
          Word-sway wielded, and the well-lovèd land-prince
          Long did rule them.[3] The ring-stemmèd vessel,
          Bark of the atheling, lay there at anchor,
          Icy in glimmer and eager for sailing;

{By his own request, his body is laid on a vessel and wafted seaward.}

       35 The belovèd leader laid they down there,
          Giver of rings, on the breast of the vessel,
          The famed by the mainmast. A many of jewels,
          Of fretted embossings, from far-lands brought over,
          Was placed near at hand then; and heard I not ever
       40 That a folk ever furnished a float more superbly
          With weapons of warfare, weeds for the battle,
          Bills and burnies; on his bosom sparkled
          Many a jewel that with him must travel
          On the flush of the flood afar on the current.
       45 And favors no fewer they furnished him soothly,
          Excellent folk-gems, than others had given him

{He leaves Daneland on the breast of a bark.}

          Who when first he was born outward did send him
          Lone on the main, the merest of infants:
          And a gold-fashioned standard they stretched under heaven
[3]    50 High o'er his head, let the holm-currents bear him,
          Seaward consigned him: sad was their spirit,
          Their mood very mournful. Men are not able

{No one knows whither the boat drifted.}

          Soothly to tell us, they in halls who reside,[4]
          Heroes under heaven, to what haven he hied.

   






{Beowulf succeeds his father Scyld}

          In the boroughs then Beowulf, bairn of the Scyldings,
          Belovèd land-prince, for long-lasting season
          Was famed mid the folk (his father departed,
          The prince from his dwelling), till afterward sprang
        5 Great-minded Healfdene; the Danes in his lifetime
          He graciously governed, grim-mooded, agèd.

{Healfdene's birth.}

          Four bairns of his body born in succession
          Woke in the world, war-troopers' leader
          Heorogar, Hrothgar, and Halga the good;
       10 Heard I that Elan was Ongentheow's consort,

{He has three sons--one of them, Hrothgar--and a daughter named Elan.
Hrothgar becomes a mighty king.}

          The well-beloved bedmate of the War-Scylfing leader.
          Then glory in battle to Hrothgar was given,
          Waxing of war-fame, that willingly kinsmen
          Obeyed his bidding, till the boys grew to manhood,
       15 A numerous band.  It burned in his spirit
          To urge his folk to found a great building,
          A mead-hall grander than men of the era

{He is eager to build a great hall in which he may feast his retainers}

          Ever had heard of, and in it to share
          With young and old all of the blessings
       20 The Lord had allowed him, save life and retainers.
          Then the work I find afar was assigned
[4]       To many races in middle-earth's regions,
          To adorn the great folk-hall. In due time it happened
          Early 'mong men, that 'twas finished entirely,
       25 The greatest of hall-buildings; Heorot he named it

{The hall is completed, and is called Heort, or Heorot.}

          Who wide-reaching word-sway wielded 'mong earlmen.
          His promise he brake not, rings he lavished,
          Treasure at banquet. Towered the hall up
          High and horn-crested, huge between antlers:
       30 It battle-waves bided, the blasting fire-demon;
          Ere long then from hottest hatred must sword-wrath
          Arise for a woman's husband and father.
          Then the mighty war-spirit[1] endured for a season,

{The Monster Grendel is madly envious of the Danemen's joy.}

          Bore it bitterly, he who bided in darkness,
       35 That light-hearted laughter loud in the building
          Greeted him daily; there was dulcet harp-music,
          Clear song of the singer. He said that was able

{[The course of the story is interrupted by a short reference to some old
account of the creation.]}

          To tell from of old earthmen's beginnings,
          That Father Almighty earth had created,
       40 The winsome wold that the water encircleth,
          Set exultingly the sun's and the moon's beams
          To lavish their lustre on land-folk and races,
          And earth He embellished in all her regions
          With limbs and leaves; life He bestowed too
       45 On all the kindreds that live under heaven.

{The glee of the warriors is overcast by a horrible dread.}

          So blessed with abundance, brimming with joyance,
          The warriors abided, till a certain one gan to
          Dog them with deeds of direfullest malice,
          A foe in the hall-building: this horrible stranger[2]
       50 Was Grendel entitled, the march-stepper famous
          Who[3] dwelt in the moor-fens, the marsh and the fastness;
          The wan-mooded being abode for a season
[5]       In the land of the giants, when the Lord and Creator
          Had banned him and branded. For that bitter murder,
       55 The killing of Abel, all-ruling Father

{Cain is referred to as a progenitor of Grendel, and of monsters in
general.}

          The kindred of Cain crushed with His vengeance;
          In the feud He rejoiced not, but far away drove him
          From kindred and kind, that crime to atone for,
          Meter of Justice. Thence ill-favored creatures,
       60 Elves and giants, monsters of ocean,
          Came into being, and the giants that longtime
          Grappled with God; He gave them requital.

 






{Grendel attacks the sleeping heroes}

          When the sun was sunken, he set out to visit
          The lofty hall-building, how the Ring-Danes had used it
          For beds and benches when the banquet was over.
          Then he found there reposing many a noble
        5 Asleep after supper; sorrow the heroes,[1]
          Misery knew not. The monster of evil
          Greedy and cruel tarried but little,

{He drags off thirty of them, and devours them}

          Fell and frantic, and forced from their slumbers
          Thirty of thanemen; thence he departed
       10 Leaping and laughing, his lair to return to,
          With surfeit of slaughter sallying homeward.
          In the dusk of the dawning, as the day was just breaking,
          Was Grendel's prowess revealed to the warriors:

{A cry of agony goes up, when Grendel's horrible deed is fully realized.}

          Then, his meal-taking finished, a moan was uplifted,
       15 Morning-cry mighty. The man-ruler famous,
          The long-worthy atheling, sat very woful,
          Suffered great sorrow, sighed for his liegemen,
[6]       When they had seen the track of the hateful pursuer,
          The spirit accursèd: too crushing that sorrow,

{The monster returns the next night.}

       20 Too loathsome and lasting. Not longer he tarried,
          But one night after continued his slaughter
          Shameless and shocking, shrinking but little
          From malice and murder; they mastered him fully.
          He was easy to find then who otherwhere looked for
       25 A pleasanter place of repose in the lodges,
          A bed in the bowers. Then was brought to his notice
          Told him truly by token apparent
          The hall-thane's hatred: he held himself after
          Further and faster who the foeman did baffle.
       30 [2]So ruled he and strongly strove against justice
          Lone against all men, till empty uptowered

{King Hrothgar's agony and suspense last twelve years.}

          The choicest of houses. Long was the season:
          Twelve-winters' time torture suffered
          The friend of the Scyldings, every affliction,
       35 Endless agony; hence it after[3] became
          Certainly known to the children of men
          Sadly in measures, that long against Hrothgar
          Grendel struggled:--his grudges he cherished,
          Murderous malice, many a winter,
       40 Strife unremitting, and peacefully wished he
          [4]Life-woe to lift from no liegeman at all of
          The men of the Dane-folk, for money to settle,
          No counsellor needed count for a moment
[7]       On handsome amends at the hands of the murderer;

{Grendel is unremitting in his persecutions.}

       45 The monster of evil fiercely did harass,
          The ill-planning death-shade, both elder and younger,
          Trapping and tricking them. He trod every night then
          The mist-covered moor-fens; men do not know where
          Witches and wizards wander and ramble.
       50 So the foe of mankind many of evils
          Grievous injuries, often accomplished,
          Horrible hermit; Heort he frequented,
          Gem-bedecked palace, when night-shades had fallen

{God is against the monster.}

          (Since God did oppose him, not the throne could he touch,[5]
       55 The light-flashing jewel, love of Him knew not).
          'Twas a fearful affliction to the friend of the Scyldings

{The king and his council deliberate in vain.}

          Soul-crushing sorrow. Not seldom in private
          Sat the king in his council; conference held they
          What the braves should determine 'gainst terrors unlooked for.

{They invoke the aid of their gods.}

       60 At the shrines of their idols often they promised
          Gifts and offerings, earnestly prayed they
          The devil from hell would help them to lighten
          Their people's oppression. Such practice they used then,
          Hope of the heathen; hell they remembered
       65 In innermost spirit, God they knew not,

{The true God they do not know.}

          Judge of their actions, All-wielding Ruler,
          No praise could they give the Guardian of Heaven,
          The Wielder of Glory. Woe will be his who
          Through furious hatred his spirit shall drive to
       70 The clutch of the fire, no comfort shall look for,
          Wax no wiser; well for the man who,
          Living his life-days, his Lord may face
          And find defence in his Father's embrace!

  





{Hrothgar sees no way of escape from the persecutions of Grendel.}

          So Healfdene's kinsman constantly mused on
          His long-lasting sorrow; the battle-thane clever
          Was not anywise able evils to 'scape from:
          Too crushing the sorrow that came to the people,
        5 Loathsome and lasting the life-grinding torture,

{Beowulf, the Geat, hero of the poem, hears of Hrothgar's sorrow, and
resolves to go to his assistance.}

          Greatest of night-woes. So Higelac's liegeman,
          Good amid Geatmen, of Grendel's achievements
          Heard in his home:[1] of heroes then living
          He was stoutest and strongest, sturdy and noble.
       10 He bade them prepare him a bark that was trusty;
          He said he the war-king would seek o'er the ocean,
          The folk-leader noble, since he needed retainers.
          For the perilous project prudent companions
          Chided him little, though loving him dearly;
       15 They egged the brave atheling, augured him glory.

{With fourteen carefully chosen companions, he sets out for Dane-land.}

          The excellent knight from the folk of the Geatmen
          Had liegemen selected, likest to prove them
          Trustworthy warriors; with fourteen companions
          The vessel he looked for; a liegeman then showed them,
       20 A sea-crafty man, the bounds of the country.
          Fast the days fleeted; the float was a-water,
          The craft by the cliff. Clomb to the prow then
          Well-equipped warriors: the wave-currents twisted
          The sea on the sand; soldiers then carried
       25 On the breast of the vessel bright-shining jewels,
          Handsome war-armor; heroes outshoved then,
          Warmen the wood-ship, on its wished-for adventure.

[9]

{The vessel sails like a bird}

          The foamy-necked floater fanned by the breeze,
          Likest a bird, glided the waters,

{In twenty four hours they reach the shores of Hrothgar's dominions}

       30 Till twenty and four hours thereafter
          The twist-stemmed vessel had traveled such distance
          That the sailing-men saw the sloping embankments,
          The sea cliffs gleaming, precipitous mountains,
          Nesses enormous: they were nearing the limits
       35 At the end of the ocean.[2] Up thence quickly
          The men of the Weders clomb to the mainland,
          Fastened their vessel (battle weeds rattled,
          War burnies clattered), the Wielder they thanked
          That the ways o'er the waters had waxen so gentle.

{They are hailed by the Danish coast guard}

       40 Then well from the cliff edge the guard of the Scyldings
          Who the sea-cliffs should see to, saw o'er the gangway
          Brave ones bearing beauteous targets,
          Armor all ready, anxiously thought he,
          Musing and wondering what men were approaching.
       45 High on his horse then Hrothgar's retainer
          Turned him to coastward, mightily brandished
          His lance in his hands, questioned with boldness.

{His challenge}

          "Who are ye men here, mail-covered warriors
          Clad in your corslets, come thus a-driving
       50 A high riding ship o'er the shoals of the waters,
          [3]And hither 'neath helmets have hied o'er the ocean?
[10]      I have been strand-guard, standing as warden,
          Lest enemies ever anywise ravage
          Danish dominions with army of war-ships.
       55 More boldly never have warriors ventured
          Hither to come; of kinsmen's approval,
          Word-leave of warriors, I ween that ye surely

{He is struck by Beowulf's appearance.}

          Nothing have known. Never a greater one
          Of earls o'er the earth have _I_ had a sight of
       60 Than is one of your number, a hero in armor;
          No low-ranking fellow[4] adorned with his weapons,
          But launching them little, unless looks are deceiving,
          And striking appearance. Ere ye pass on your journey
          As treacherous spies to the land of the Scyldings
       65 And farther fare, I fully must know now
          What race ye belong to. Ye far-away dwellers,
          Sea-faring sailors, my simple opinion
          Hear ye and hearken: haste is most fitting
          Plainly to tell me what place ye are come from."

  





{Beowulf courteously replies.}

          The chief of the strangers rendered him answer,
          War-troopers' leader, and word-treasure opened:

{We are Geats.}

          "We are sprung from the lineage of the people of Geatland,
          And Higelac's hearth-friends. To heroes unnumbered

{My father Ecgtheow was well-known in his day.}

        5 My father was known, a noble head-warrior
          Ecgtheow titled; many a winter
          He lived with the people, ere he passed on his journey,
          Old from his dwelling; each of the counsellors
          Widely mid world-folk well remembers him.

{Our intentions towards King Hrothgar are of the kindest.}

       10 We, kindly of spirit, the lord of thy people,
          The son of King Healfdene, have come here to visit,
[11]      Folk-troop's defender: be free in thy counsels!
          To the noble one bear we a weighty commission,
          The helm of the Danemen; we shall hide, I ween,

{Is it true that a monster is slaying Danish heroes?}

       15 Naught of our message. Thou know'st if it happen,
          As we soothly heard say, that some savage despoiler,
          Some hidden pursuer, on nights that are murky
          By deeds very direful 'mid the Danemen exhibits
          Hatred unheard of, horrid destruction
       20 And the falling of dead. From feelings least selfish

{I can help your king to free himself from this horrible creature.}

          I am able to render counsel to Hrothgar,
          How he, wise and worthy, may worst the destroyer,
          If the anguish of sorrow should ever be lessened,[1]
          Comfort come to him, and care-waves grow cooler,
       25 Or ever hereafter he agony suffer
          And troublous distress, while towereth upward
          The handsomest of houses high on the summit."

{The coast-guard reminds Beowulf that it is easier to say than to do.}

          Bestriding his stallion, the strand-watchman answered,
          The doughty retainer: "The difference surely
       30 'Twixt words and works, the warlike shield-bearer
          Who judgeth wisely well shall determine.
          This band, I hear, beareth no malice

{I am satisfied of your good intentions, and shall lead you to the
palace.}

          To the prince of the Scyldings. Pass ye then onward
          With weapons and armor. I shall lead you in person;
       35 To my war-trusty vassals command I shall issue
          To keep from all injury your excellent vessel,

{Your boat shall be well cared for during your stay here.}

          Your fresh-tarred craft, 'gainst every opposer
          Close by the sea-shore, till the curved-neckèd bark shall
          Waft back again the well-beloved hero
       40 O'er the way of the water to Weder dominions.

{He again compliments Beowulf.}

          To warrior so great 'twill be granted sure
          In the storm of strife to stand secure."
          Onward they fared then (the vessel lay quiet,
          The broad-bosomed bark was bound by its cable,
[12]   45 Firmly at anchor); the boar-signs glistened[2]
          Bright on the visors vivid with gilding,
          Blaze-hardened, brilliant; the boar acted warden.
          The heroes hastened, hurried the liegemen,

{The land is perhaps rolling.}

          Descended together, till they saw the great palace,
       50 The well-fashioned wassail-hall wondrous and gleaming:

{Heorot flashes on their view.}

          'Mid world-folk and kindreds that was widest reputed
          Of halls under heaven which the hero abode in;
          Its lustre enlightened lands without number.
          Then the battle-brave hero showed them the glittering
       55 Court of the bold ones, that they easily thither
          Might fare on their journey; the aforementioned warrior
          Turning his courser, quoth as he left them:

{The coast-guard, having discharged his duty, bids them God-speed.}

          "'Tis time I were faring; Father Almighty
          Grant you His grace, and give you to journey
       60 Safe on your mission! To the sea I will get me
          'Gainst hostile warriors as warden to stand."








          The highway glistened with many-hued pebble,
          A by-path led the liegemen together.
          [1]Firm and hand-locked the war-burnie glistened,
          The ring-sword radiant rang 'mid the armor
        5 As the party was approaching the palace together

{They set their arms and armor against the wall.}

          In warlike equipments. 'Gainst the wall of the building
          Their wide-fashioned war-shields they weary did set then,
[13]      Battle-shields sturdy; benchward they turned then;
          Their battle-sarks rattled, the gear of the heroes;
       10 The lances stood up then, all in a cluster,
          The arms of the seamen, ashen-shafts mounted
          With edges of iron: the armor-clad troopers

{A Danish hero asks them whence and why they are come.}

          Were decked with weapons. Then a proud-mooded hero
          Asked of the champions questions of lineage:
       15 "From what borders bear ye your battle-shields plated,
          Gilded and gleaming, your gray-colored burnies,
          Helmets with visors and heap of war-lances?--
          To Hrothgar the king I am servant and liegeman.
          'Mong folk from far-lands found I have never

{He expresses no little admiration for the strangers.}

       20 Men so many of mien more courageous.
          I ween that from valor, nowise as outlaws,
          But from greatness of soul ye sought for King Hrothgar."

{Beowulf replies.}

          Then the strength-famous earlman answer rendered,
          The proud-mooded Wederchief replied to his question,

{We are Higelac's table-companions, and bear an important commission to
your prince.}

       25 Hardy 'neath helmet: "Higelac's mates are we;
          Beowulf hight I. To the bairn of Healfdene,
          The famous folk-leader, I freely will tell
          To thy prince my commission, if pleasantly hearing
          He'll grant we may greet him so gracious to all men."
       30 Wulfgar replied then (he was prince of the Wendels,
          His boldness of spirit was known unto many,
          His prowess and prudence): "The prince of the Scyldings,

{Wulfgar, the thane, says that he will go and ask Hrothgar whether he will
see the strangers.}

          The friend-lord of Danemen, I will ask of thy journey,
          The giver of rings, as thou urgest me do it,
       35 The folk-chief famous, and inform thee early
          What answer the good one mindeth to render me."
          He turned then hurriedly where Hrothgar was sitting,
          [2]Old and hoary, his earlmen attending him;
          The strength-famous went till he stood at the shoulder
       40 Of the lord of the Danemen, of courteous thanemen
          The custom he minded. Wulfgar addressed then
          His friendly liegelord: "Folk of the Geatmen

[14]

{He thereupon urges his liegelord to receive the visitors courteously.}

          O'er the way of the waters are wafted hither,
          Faring from far-lands: the foremost in rank
       45 The battle-champions Beowulf title.
          They make this petition: with thee, O my chieftain,
          To be granted a conference; O gracious King Hrothgar,
          Friendly answer refuse not to give them!

{Hrothgar, too, is struck with Beowulf's appearance.}

          In war-trappings weeded worthy they seem
       50 Of earls to be honored; sure the atheling is doughty
          Who headed the heroes hitherward coming."








{Hrothgar remembers Beowulf as a youth, and also remembers his father.}

          Hrothgar answered, helm of the Scyldings:
          "I remember this man as the merest of striplings.
          His father long dead now was Ecgtheow titled,
          Him Hrethel the Geatman granted at home his
        5 One only daughter; his battle-brave son
          Is come but now, sought a trustworthy friend.
          Seafaring sailors asserted it then,

{Beowulf is reported to have the strength of thirty men.}

          Who valuable gift-gems of the Geatmen[1] carried
          As peace-offering thither, that he thirty men's grapple
       10 Has in his hand, the hero-in-battle.

{God hath sent him to our rescue.}

          The holy Creator usward sent him,
          To West-Dane warriors, I ween, for to render
          'Gainst Grendel's grimness gracious assistance:
          I shall give to the good one gift-gems for courage.
       15 Hasten to bid them hither to speed them,[2]
          To see assembled this circle of kinsmen;
          Tell them expressly they're welcome in sooth to
          The men of the Danes." To the door of the building

[15]

{Wulfgar invites the strangers in.}

          Wulfgar went then, this word-message shouted:
       20 "My victorious liegelord bade me to tell you,
          The East-Danes' atheling, that your origin knows he,
          And o'er wave-billows wafted ye welcome are hither,
          Valiant of spirit. Ye straightway may enter
          Clad in corslets, cased in your helmets,
       25 To see King Hrothgar. Here let your battle-boards,
          Wood-spears and war-shafts, await your conferring."
          The mighty one rose then, with many a liegeman,
          An excellent thane-group; some there did await them,
          And as bid of the brave one the battle-gear guarded.
       30 Together they hied them, while the hero did guide them,
          'Neath Heorot's roof; the high-minded went then
          Sturdy 'neath helmet till he stood in the building.
          Beowulf spake (his burnie did glisten,
          His armor seamed over by the art of the craftsman):

{Beowulf salutes Hrothgar, and then proceeds to boast of his youthful
achievements.}

       35 "Hail thou, Hrothgar! I am Higelac's kinsman
          And vassal forsooth; many a wonder
          I dared as a stripling. The doings of Grendel,
          In far-off fatherland I fully did know of:
          Sea-farers tell us, this hall-building standeth,
       40 Excellent edifice, empty and useless
          To all the earlmen after evenlight's glimmer
          'Neath heaven's bright hues hath hidden its glory.
          This my earls then urged me, the most excellent of them,
          Carles very clever, to come and assist thee,
       45 Folk-leader Hrothgar; fully they knew of

{His fight with the nickers.}

          The strength of my body. Themselves they beheld me
          When I came from the contest, when covered with gore
          Foes I escaped from, where five[3] I had bound,
[16]      The giant-race wasted, in the waters destroying
       50 The nickers by night, bore numberless sorrows,
          The Weders avenged (woes had they suffered)
          Enemies ravaged; alone now with Grendel

{He intends to fight Grendel unaided.}

          I shall manage the matter, with the monster of evil,
          The giant, decide it. Thee I would therefore
       55 Beg of thy bounty, Bright-Danish chieftain,
          Lord of the Scyldings, this single petition:
          Not to refuse me, defender of warriors,
          Friend-lord of folks, so far have I sought thee,
          That _I_ may unaided, my earlmen assisting me,
       60 This brave-mooded war-band, purify Heorot.
          I have heard on inquiry, the horrible creature

{Since the monster uses no weapons,}

          From veriest rashness recks not for weapons;
          I this do scorn then, so be Higelac gracious,
          My liegelord belovèd, lenient of spirit,
       65 To bear a blade or a broad-fashioned target,
          A shield to the onset; only with hand-grip

{I, too, shall disdain to use any.}

          The foe I must grapple, fight for my life then,
          Foeman with foeman; he fain must rely on
          The doom of the Lord whom death layeth hold of.

{Should he crush me, he will eat my companions as he has eaten thy
thanes.}

       70 I ween he will wish, if he win in the struggle,
          To eat in the war-hall earls of the Geat-folk,
          Boldly to swallow[4] them, as of yore he did often
          The best of the Hrethmen! Thou needest not trouble
          A head-watch to give me;[5] he will have me dripping

[17]

{In case of my defeat, thou wilt not have the trouble of burying me.}

       75 And dreary with gore, if death overtake me,[6]
          Will bear me off bleeding, biting and mouthing me,
          The hermit will eat me, heedless of pity,
          Marking the moor-fens; no more wilt thou need then

{Should I fall, send my armor to my lord, King Higelac.}

          Find me my food.[7] If I fall in the battle,
       80 Send to Higelac the armor that serveth
          To shield my bosom, the best of equipments,
          Richest of ring-mails; 'tis the relic of Hrethla,

{Weird is supreme}

          The work of Wayland. Goes Weird as she must go!"

  





{Hrothgar responds.}

          Hrothgar discoursed, helm of the Scyldings:
          "To defend our folk and to furnish assistance,[1]
          Thou soughtest us hither, good friend Beowulf.

{Reminiscences of Beowulf's father, Ecgtheow.}

          The fiercest of feuds thy father engaged in,
        5 Heatholaf killed he in hand-to-hand conflict
          'Mid Wilfingish warriors; then the Wederish people
          For fear of a feud were forced to disown him.
          Thence flying he fled to the folk of the South-Danes,
[18]      The race of the Scyldings, o'er the roll of the waters;
       10 I had lately begun then to govern the Danemen,
          The hoard-seat of heroes held in my youth,
          Rich in its jewels: dead was Heregar,
          My kinsman and elder had earth-joys forsaken,
          Healfdene his bairn. He was better than I am!
       15 That feud thereafter for a fee I compounded;
          O'er the weltering waters to the Wilfings I sent
          Ornaments old; oaths did he swear me.

{Hrothgar recounts to Beowulf the horrors of Grendel's persecutions.}

          It pains me in spirit to any to tell it,
          What grief in Heorot Grendel hath caused me,
       20 What horror unlooked-for, by hatred unceasing.
          Waned is my war-band, wasted my hall-troop;
          Weird hath offcast them to the clutches of Grendel.
          God can easily hinder the scather
          From deeds so direful. Oft drunken with beer

{My thanes have made many boasts, but have not executed them.}

       25 O'er the ale-vessel promised warriors in armor
          They would willingly wait on the wassailing-benches
          A grapple with Grendel, with grimmest of edges.
          Then this mead-hall at morning with murder was reeking,
          The building was bloody at breaking of daylight,
       30 The bench-deals all flooded, dripping and bloodied,
          The folk-hall was gory: I had fewer retainers,
          Dear-beloved warriors, whom death had laid hold of.

{Sit down to the feast, and give us comfort.}

          Sit at the feast now, thy intents unto heroes,[2]
          Thy victor-fame show, as thy spirit doth urge thee!"

{A bench is made ready for Beowulf and his party.}

       35 For the men of the Geats then together assembled,
          In the beer-hall blithesome a bench was made ready;
          There warlike in spirit they went to be seated,
          Proud and exultant. A liegeman did service,
[19]      Who a beaker embellished bore with decorum,

{The gleeman sings}

       40 And gleaming-drink poured. The gleeman sang whilom

{The heroes all rejoice together.}

          Hearty in Heorot; there was heroes' rejoicing,
          A numerous war-band of Weders and Danemen.

   

{Unferth, a thane of Hrothgar, is jealous of Beowulf, and undertakes to
twit him.}

          Unferth spoke up, Ecglaf his son,
          Who sat at the feet of the lord of the Scyldings,
          Opened the jousting (the journey[1] of Beowulf,
          Sea-farer doughty, gave sorrow to Unferth
        5 And greatest chagrin, too, for granted he never
          That any man else on earth should attain to,
          Gain under heaven, more glory than he):

{Did you take part in a swimming-match with Breca?}

          "Art thou that Beowulf with Breca did struggle,
          On the wide sea-currents at swimming contended,
       10 Where to humor your pride the ocean ye tried,

{'Twas mere folly that actuated you both to risk your lives on the ocean.}

          From vainest vaunting adventured your bodies
          In care of the waters? And no one was able
          Nor lief nor loth one, in the least to dissuade you
          Your difficult voyage; then ye ventured a-swimming,
       15 Where your arms outstretching the streams ye did cover,
          The mere-ways measured, mixing and stirring them,
          Glided the ocean; angry the waves were,
          With the weltering of winter. In the water's possession,
          Ye toiled for a seven-night; he at swimming outdid thee,
       20 In strength excelled thee. Then early at morning
          On the Heathoremes' shore the holm-currents tossed him,
          Sought he thenceward the home of his fathers,
          Beloved of his liegemen, the land of the Brondings,
          The peace-castle pleasant, where a people he wielded,
[20]   25 Had borough and jewels. The pledge that he made thee

{Breca outdid you entirely.}

          The son of Beanstan hath soothly accomplished.
          Then I ween thou wilt find thee less fortunate issue,

{Much more will Grendel outdo you, if you vie with him in prowess.}

          Though ever triumphant in onset of battle,
          A grim grappling, if Grendel thou darest
       30 For the space of a night near-by to wait for!"

{Beowulf retaliates.}

          Beowulf answered, offspring of Ecgtheow:
          "My good friend Unferth, sure freely and wildly,

{O friend Unferth, you are fuddled with beer, and cannot talk coherently.}

          Thou fuddled with beer of Breca hast spoken,
          Hast told of his journey! A fact I allege it,
       35 That greater strength in the waters I had then,
          Ills in the ocean, than any man else had.
          We made agreement as the merest of striplings
          Promised each other (both of us then were

{We simply kept an engagement made in early life.}

          Younkers in years) that we yet would adventure
       40 Out on the ocean; it all we accomplished.
          While swimming the sea-floods, sword-blade unscabbarded
          Boldly we brandished, our bodies expected
          To shield from the sharks. He sure was unable

{He _could_ not excel me, and I _would_ not excel him.}

          To swim on the waters further than I could,
       45 More swift on the waves, nor _would_ I from him go.
          Then we two companions stayed in the ocean

{After five days the currents separated us.}

          Five nights together, till the currents did part us,
          The weltering waters, weathers the bleakest,
          And nethermost night, and the north-wind whistled
       50 Fierce in our faces; fell were the billows.
          The mere fishes' mood was mightily ruffled:
          And there against foemen my firm-knotted corslet,
          Hand-jointed, hardy, help did afford me;
          My battle-sark braided, brilliantly gilded,

{A horrible sea-beast attacked me, but I slew him.}

       55 Lay on my bosom. To the bottom then dragged me,
          A hateful fiend-scather, seized me and held me,
          Grim in his grapple: 'twas granted me, nathless,
          To pierce the monster with the point of my weapon,
          My obedient blade; battle offcarried
       60 The mighty mere-creature by means of my hand-blow.





          "So ill-meaning enemies often did cause me
          Sorrow the sorest. I served them, in quittance,

{My dear sword always served me faithfully.}

          With my dear-lovèd sword, as in sooth it was fitting;
          They missed the pleasure of feasting abundantly,
        5 Ill-doers evil, of eating my body,
          Of surrounding the banquet deep in the ocean;
          But wounded with edges early at morning
          They were stretched a-high on the strand of the ocean,

{I put a stop to the outrages of the sea-monsters.}

          Put to sleep with the sword, that sea-going travelers
       10 No longer thereafter were hindered from sailing
          The foam-dashing currents. Came a light from the east,
          God's beautiful beacon; the billows subsided,
          That well I could see the nesses projecting,

{Fortune helps the brave earl.}

          The blustering crags. Weird often saveth
       15 The undoomed hero if doughty his valor!
          But me did it fortune[1] to fell with my weapon
          Nine of the nickers. Of night-struggle harder
          'Neath dome of the heaven heard I but rarely,
          Nor of wight more woful in the waves of the ocean;
       20 Yet I 'scaped with my life the grip of the monsters,

{After that escape I drifted to Finland.}

          Weary from travel. Then the waters bare me
          To the land of the Finns, the flood with the current,

{I have never heard of your doing any such bold deeds.}

          The weltering waves. Not a word hath been told me
          Of deeds so daring done by thee, Unferth,
       25 And of sword-terror none; never hath Breca
          At the play of the battle, nor either of you two,
          Feat so fearless performèd with weapons
          Glinting and gleaming . . . . . . . . . . . .
[22]      . . . . . . . . . . . . I utter no boasting;

{You are a slayer of brothers, and will suffer damnation, wise as you may
be.}

       30 Though with cold-blooded cruelty thou killedst thy brothers,
          Thy nearest of kin; thou needs must in hell get
          Direful damnation, though doughty thy wisdom.
          I tell thee in earnest, offspring of Ecglaf,
          Never had Grendel such numberless horrors,
       35 The direful demon, done to thy liegelord,
          Harrying in Heorot, if thy heart were as sturdy,

{Had your acts been as brave as your words, Grendel had not ravaged your
land so long.}

          Thy mood as ferocious as thou dost describe them.
          He hath found out fully that the fierce-burning hatred,
          The edge-battle eager, of all of your kindred,
       40 Of the Victory-Scyldings, need little dismay him:
          Oaths he exacteth, not any he spares

{The monster is not afraid of the Danes,}

          Of the folk of the Danemen, but fighteth with pleasure,
          Killeth and feasteth, no contest expecteth

{but he will soon learn to dread the Geats.}

          From Spear-Danish people. But the prowess and valor
       45 Of the earls of the Geatmen early shall venture
          To give him a grapple. He shall go who is able
          Bravely to banquet, when the bright-light of morning

{On the second day, any warrior may go unmolested to the mead-banquet.}

          Which the second day bringeth, the sun in its ether-robes,
          O'er children of men shines from the southward!"
       50 Then the gray-haired, war-famed giver of treasure

{Hrothgar's spirits are revived.}

          Was blithesome and joyous, the Bright-Danish ruler
          Expected assistance; the people's protector

{The old king trusts Beowulf. The heroes are joyful.}

          Heard from Beowulf his bold resolution.
          There was laughter of heroes; loud was the clatter,
       55 The words were winsome. Wealhtheow advanced then,

{Queen Wealhtheow plays the hostess.}

          Consort of Hrothgar, of courtesy mindful,
          Gold-decked saluted the men in the building,
          And the freeborn woman the beaker presented

{She offers the cup to her husband first.}

          To the lord of the kingdom, first of the East-Danes,
       60 Bade him be blithesome when beer was a-flowing,
          Lief to his liegemen; he lustily tasted
          Of banquet and beaker, battle-famed ruler.
          The Helmingish lady then graciously circled
          'Mid all the liegemen lesser and greater:

[23]

{She gives presents to the heroes.}

       65 Treasure-cups tendered, till time was afforded
          That the decorous-mooded, diademed folk-queen

{Then she offers the cup to Beowulf, thanking God that aid has come.}

          Might bear to Beowulf the bumper o'errunning;
          She greeted the Geat-prince, God she did thank,
          Most wise in her words, that her wish was accomplished,
       70 That in any of earlmen she ever should look for
          Solace in sorrow. He accepted the beaker,
          Battle-bold warrior, at Wealhtheow's giving,

{Beowulf states to the queen the object of his visit.}

          Then equipped for combat quoth he in measures,
          Beowulf spake, offspring of Ecgtheow:
       75 "I purposed in spirit when I mounted the ocean,

{I determined to do or die.}

          When I boarded my boat with a band of my liegemen,
          I would work to the fullest the will of your people
          Or in foe's-clutches fastened fall in the battle.
          Deeds I shall do of daring and prowess,
       80 Or the last of my life-days live in this mead-hall."
          These words to the lady were welcome and pleasing,
          The boast of the Geatman; with gold trappings broidered
          Went the freeborn folk-queen her fond-lord to sit by.

{Glee is high.}

          Then again as of yore was heard in the building
       85 Courtly discussion, conquerors' shouting,
          Heroes were happy, till Healfdene's son would
          Go to his slumber to seek for refreshing;
          For the horrid hell-monster in the hall-building knew he
          A fight was determined,[2] since the light of the sun they
       90 No longer could see, and lowering darkness
          O'er all had descended, and dark under heaven
          Shadowy shapes came shying around them.

{Hrothgar retires, leaving Beowulf in charge of the hall.}

          The liegemen all rose then. One saluted the other,
          Hrothgar Beowulf, in rhythmical measures,
       95 Wishing him well, and, the wassail-hall giving
          To his care and keeping, quoth he departing:
[24]      "Not to any one else have I ever entrusted,
          But thee and thee only, the hall of the Danemen,
          Since high I could heave my hand and my buckler.
      100 Take thou in charge now the noblest of houses;
          Be mindful of honor, exhibiting prowess,
          Watch 'gainst the foeman! Thou shalt want no enjoyments,
          Survive thou safely adventure so glorious!"



{Hrothgar retires.}

          Then Hrothgar departed, his earl-throng attending him,
          Folk-lord of Scyldings, forth from the building;
          The war-chieftain wished then Wealhtheow to look for,
          The queen for a bedmate. To keep away Grendel

{God has provided a watch for the hall.}

        5 The Glory of Kings had given a hall-watch,
          As men heard recounted: for the king of the Danemen
          He did special service, gave the giant a watcher:
          And the prince of the Geatmen implicitly trusted

{Beowulf is self-confident}

          His warlike strength and the Wielder's protection.

{He prepares for rest.}

       10 His armor of iron off him he did then,
          His helmet from his head, to his henchman committed
          His chased-handled chain-sword, choicest of weapons,
          And bade him bide with his battle-equipments.
          The good one then uttered words of defiance,
       15 Beowulf Geatman, ere his bed he upmounted:

{Beowulf boasts of his ability to cope with Grendel.}

          "I hold me no meaner in matters of prowess,
          In warlike achievements, than Grendel does himself;
          Hence I seek not with sword-edge to sooth him to slumber,
          Of life to bereave him, though well I am able.

{We will fight with nature's weapons only.}

       20 No battle-skill[1] has he, that blows he should strike me,
          To shatter my shield, though sure he is mighty
[25]      In strife and destruction; but struggling by night we
          Shall do without edges, dare he to look for
          Weaponless warfare, and wise-mooded Father
       25 The glory apportion, God ever-holy,

{God may decide who shall conquer}

          On which hand soever to him seemeth proper."
          Then the brave-mooded hero bent to his slumber,
          The pillow received the cheek of the noble;

{The Geatish warriors lie down.}

          And many a martial mere-thane attending
       30 Sank to his slumber. Seemed it unlikely

{They thought it very unlikely that they should ever see their homes
again.}

          That ever thereafter any should hope to
          Be happy at home, hero-friends visit
          Or the lordly troop-castle where he lived from his childhood;
          They had heard how slaughter had snatched from the wine-hall,
       35 Had recently ravished, of the race of the Scyldings

{But God raised up a deliverer.}

          Too many by far. But the Lord to them granted
          The weaving of war-speed, to Wederish heroes
          Aid and comfort, that every opponent
          By one man's war-might they worsted and vanquished,

{God rules the world.}

       40 By the might of himself; the truth is established
          That God Almighty hath governed for ages
          Kindreds and nations. A night very lurid

{Grendel comes to Heorot.}

          The trav'ler-at-twilight came tramping and striding.
          The warriors were sleeping who should watch the horned-building,

{Only one warrior is awake.}

       45 One only excepted. 'Mid earthmen 'twas 'stablished,
          Th' implacable foeman was powerless to hurl them
          To the land of shadows, if the Lord were unwilling;
          But serving as warder, in terror to foemen,
          He angrily bided the issue of battle.[2]



{Grendel comes from the fens.}

          'Neath the cloudy cliffs came from the moor then
          Grendel going, God's anger bare he.
          The monster intended some one of earthmen
          In the hall-building grand to entrap and make way with:

{He goes towards the joyous building.}

        5 He went under welkin where well he knew of
          The wine-joyous building, brilliant with plating,
          Gold-hall of earthmen. Not the earliest occasion

{This was not his first visit there.}

          He the home and manor of Hrothgar had sought:
          Ne'er found he in life-days later nor earlier
       10 Hardier hero, hall-thanes[1] more sturdy!
          Then came to the building the warrior marching,

{His horrid fingers tear the door open.}

          Bereft of his joyance. The door quickly opened
          On fire-hinges fastened, when his fingers had touched it;
          The fell one had flung then--his fury so bitter--
       15 Open the entrance. Early thereafter
          The foeman trod the shining hall-pavement,

{He strides furiously into the hall.}

          Strode he angrily; from the eyes of him glimmered
          A lustre unlovely likest to fire.
          He beheld in the hall the heroes in numbers,
       20 A circle of kinsmen sleeping together,

{He exults over his supposed prey.}

          A throng of thanemen: then his thoughts were exultant,
          He minded to sunder from each of the thanemen
          The life from his body, horrible demon,
          Ere morning came, since fate had allowed him

{Fate has decreed that he shall devour no more heroes. Beowulf suffers
from suspense.}

       25 The prospect of plenty. Providence willed not
          To permit him any more of men under heaven
          To eat in the night-time. Higelac's kinsman
          Great sorrow endured how the dire-mooded creature
[27]      In unlooked-for assaults were likely to bear him.
       30 No thought had the monster of deferring the matter,

{Grendel immediately seizes a sleeping warrior, and devours him.}

          But on earliest occasion he quickly laid hold of
          A soldier asleep, suddenly tore him,
          Bit his bone-prison, the blood drank in currents,
          Swallowed in mouthfuls: he soon had the dead man's
       35 Feet and hands, too, eaten entirely.
          Nearer he strode then, the stout-hearted warrior

{Beowulf and Grendel grapple.}

          Snatched as he slumbered, seizing with hand-grip,
          Forward the foeman foined with his hand;
          Caught he quickly the cunning deviser,
       40 On his elbow he rested. This early discovered
          The master of malice, that in middle-earth's regions,
          'Neath the whole of the heavens, no hand-grapple greater

{The monster is amazed at Beowulf's strength.}

          In any man else had he ever encountered:
          Fearful in spirit, faint-mooded waxed he,
       45 Not off could betake him; death he was pondering,

{He is anxious to flee.}

          Would fly to his covert, seek the devils' assembly:
          His calling no more was the same he had followed
          Long in his lifetime. The liege-kinsman worthy

{Beowulf recalls his boast of the evening, and determines to fulfil it.}

          Of Higelac minded his speech of the evening,
       50 Stood he up straight and stoutly did seize him.
          His fingers crackled; the giant was outward,
          The earl stepped farther. The famous one minded
          To flee away farther, if he found an occasion,
          And off and away, avoiding delay,
       55 To fly to the fen-moors; he fully was ware of
          The strength of his grapple in the grip of the foeman.

{'Twas a luckless day for Grendel.}

          'Twas an ill-taken journey that the injury-bringing,
          Harrying harmer to Heorot wandered:

{The hall groans.}

          The palace re-echoed; to all of the Danemen,
       60 Dwellers in castles, to each of the bold ones,
          Earlmen, was terror. Angry they both were,
          Archwarders raging.[2] Rattled the building;
[28]      'Twas a marvellous wonder that the wine-hall withstood then
          The bold-in-battle, bent not to earthward,
       65 Excellent earth-hall; but within and without it
          Was fastened so firmly in fetters of iron,
          By the art of the armorer. Off from the sill there
          Bent mead-benches many, as men have informed me,
          Adorned with gold-work, where the grim ones did struggle.
       70 The Scylding wise men weened ne'er before
          That by might and main-strength a man under heaven
          Might break it in pieces, bone-decked, resplendent,
          Crush it by cunning, unless clutch of the fire
          In smoke should consume it. The sound mounted upward

{Grendel's cries terrify the Danes.}

       75 Novel enough; on the North Danes fastened
          A terror of anguish, on all of the men there
          Who heard from the wall the weeping and plaining,
          The song of defeat from the foeman of heaven,
          Heard him hymns of horror howl, and his sorrow
       80 Hell-bound bewailing. He held him too firmly
          Who was strongest of main-strength of men of that era.



{Beowulf has no idea of letting Grendel live.}

          For no cause whatever would the earlmen's defender
          Leave in life-joys the loathsome newcomer,
          He deemed his existence utterly useless
          To men under heaven. Many a noble
        5 Of Beowulf brandished his battle-sword old,
          Would guard the life of his lord and protector,
          The far-famous chieftain, if able to do so;
          While waging the warfare, this wist they but little,
          Brave battle-thanes, while his body intending

{No weapon would harm Grendel; he bore a charmed life.}

       10 To slit into slivers, and seeking his spirit:
          That the relentless foeman nor finest of weapons
          Of all on the earth, nor any of war-bills
[29]      Was willing to injure; but weapons of victory
          Swords and suchlike he had sworn to dispense with.
       15 His death at that time must prove to be wretched,
          And the far-away spirit widely should journey
          Into enemies' power. This plainly he saw then
          Who with mirth[1] of mood malice no little
          Had wrought in the past on the race of the earthmen
       20 (To God he was hostile), that his body would fail him,
          But Higelac's hardy henchman and kinsman
          Held him by the hand; hateful to other

{Grendel is sorely wounded.}

          Was each one if living. A body-wound suffered
          The direful demon, damage incurable

{His body bursts.}

       25 Was seen on his shoulder, his sinews were shivered,
          His body did burst. To Beowulf was given
          Glory in battle; Grendel from thenceward
          Must flee and hide him in the fen-cliffs and marshes,
          Sick unto death, his dwelling must look for
       30 Unwinsome and woful; he wist the more fully

{The monster flees away to hide in the moors.}

          The end of his earthly existence was nearing,
          His life-days' limits. At last for the Danemen,
          When the slaughter was over, their wish was accomplished.
          The comer-from-far-land had cleansed then of evil,
       35 Wise and valiant, the war-hall of Hrothgar,
          Saved it from violence. He joyed in the night-work,
          In repute for prowess; the prince of the Geatmen
          For the East-Danish people his boast had accomplished,
          Bettered their burdensome bale-sorrows fully,
       40 The craft-begot evil they erstwhile had suffered
          And were forced to endure from crushing oppression,
          Their manifold misery. 'Twas a manifest token,

{Beowulf suspends Grendel's hand and arm in Heorot.}

          When the hero-in-battle the hand suspended,
          The arm and the shoulder (there was all of the claw
       45 Of Grendel together) 'neath great-stretching hall-roof.



{At early dawn, warriors from far and near come together to hear of the
night's adventures.}

          In the mist of the morning many a warrior
          Stood round the gift-hall, as the story is told me:
          Folk-princes fared then from far and from near
          Through long-stretching journeys to look at the wonder,
        5 The footprints of the foeman. Few of the warriors

{Few warriors lamented Grendel's destruction.}

          Who gazed on the foot-tracks of the inglorious creature
          His parting from life pained very deeply,
          How, weary in spirit, off from those regions
          In combats conquered he carried his traces,
       10 Fated and flying, to the flood of the nickers.

{Grendel's blood dyes the waters.}

          There in bloody billows bubbled the currents,
          The angry eddy was everywhere mingled
          And seething with gore, welling with sword-blood;[1]
          He death-doomed had hid him, when reaved of his joyance
       15 He laid down his life in the lair he had fled to,
          His heathenish spirit, where hell did receive him.
          Thence the friends from of old backward turned them,
          And many a younker from merry adventure,
          Striding their stallions, stout from the seaward,
       20 Heroes on horses. There were heard very often

{Beowulf is the hero of the hour.}

          Beowulf's praises; many often asserted
          That neither south nor north, in the circuit of waters,

{He is regarded as a probable successor to Hrothgar.}

          O'er outstretching earth-plain, none other was better
          'Mid bearers of war-shields, more worthy to govern,
       25 'Neath the arch of the ether. Not any, however,
          'Gainst the friend-lord muttered, mocking-words uttered

{But no word is uttered to derogate from the old king}

          Of Hrothgar the gracious (a good king he).
          Oft the famed ones permitted their fallow-skinned horses
[31]      To run in rivalry, racing and chasing,
       30 Where the fieldways appeared to them fair and inviting,
          Known for their excellence; oft a thane of the folk-lord,[2]

{The gleeman sings the deeds of heroes.}

          [3]A man of celebrity, mindful of rhythms,
          Who ancient traditions treasured in memory,
          New word-groups found properly bound:
       35 The bard after 'gan then Beowulf's venture

{He sings in alliterative measures of Beowulf's prowess.}

          Wisely to tell of, and words that were clever
          To utter skilfully, earnestly speaking,
          Everything told he that he heard as to Sigmund's

{Also of Sigemund, who has slain a great fire-dragon.}

          Mighty achievements, many things hidden,
       40 The strife of the Wælsing, the wide-going ventures
          The children of men knew of but little,
          The feud and the fury, but Fitela with him,
          When suchlike matters he minded to speak of,
          Uncle to nephew, as in every contention
       45 Each to other was ever devoted:
          A numerous host of the race of the scathers
          They had slain with the sword-edge. To Sigmund accrued then
          No little of glory, when his life-days were over,
          Since he sturdy in struggle had destroyed the great dragon,
       50 The hoard-treasure's keeper; 'neath the hoar-grayish stone he,
          The son of the atheling, unaided adventured
          The perilous project; not present was Fitela,
          Yet the fortune befell him of forcing his weapon
          Through the marvellous dragon, that it stood in the wall,
       55 Well-honored weapon; the worm was slaughtered.
          The great one had gained then by his glorious achievement
          To reap from the ring-hoard richest enjoyment,
[32]      As best it did please him: his vessel he loaded,
          Shining ornaments on the ship's bosom carried,
       60 Kinsman of Wæls: the drake in heat melted.

{Sigemund was widely famed.}

          He was farthest famed of fugitive pilgrims,
          Mid wide-scattered world-folk, for works of great prowess,
          War-troopers' shelter: hence waxed he in honor.[4]

{Heremod, an unfortunate Danish king, is introduced by way of contrast.}

          Afterward Heremod's hero-strength failed him,
       65 His vigor and valor. 'Mid venomous haters
          To the hands of foemen he was foully delivered,
          Offdriven early. Agony-billows

{Unlike Sigemund and Beowulf, Heremod was a burden to his people.}

          Oppressed him too long, to his people he became then,
          To all the athelings, an ever-great burden;
       70 And the daring one's journey in days of yore
          Many wise men were wont to deplore,
          Such as hoped he would bring them help in their sorrow,
          That the son of their ruler should rise into power,
          Holding the headship held by his fathers,
       75 Should govern the people, the gold-hoard and borough,
          The kingdom of heroes, the realm of the Scyldings.

{Beowulf is an honor to his race.}

          He to all men became then far more beloved,
          Higelac's kinsman, to kindreds and races,
          To his friends much dearer; him malice assaulted.--

{The story is resumed.}

       80 Oft running and racing on roadsters they measured
          The dun-colored highways. Then the light of the morning
          Was hurried and hastened. Went henchmen in numbers
          To the beautiful building, bold ones in spirit,
          To look at the wonder; the liegelord himself then
       85 From his wife-bower wending, warden of treasures,
          Glorious trod with troopers unnumbered,
          Famed for his virtues, and with him the queen-wife
          Measured the mead-ways, with maidens attending.




          Hrothgar discoursed (to the hall-building went he,
          He stood by the pillar,[1] saw the steep-rising hall-roof
          Gleaming with gold-gems, and Grendel his hand there):

{Hrothgar gives thanks for the overthrow of the monster.}

          "For the sight we behold now, thanks to the Wielder
        5 Early be offered! Much evil I bided,
          Snaring from Grendel:[2] God can e'er 'complish
          Wonder on wonder, Wielder of Glory!

{I had given up all hope, when this brave liegeman came to our aid.}

          But lately I reckoned ne'er under heaven
          Comfort to gain me for any of sorrows,
       10 While the handsomest of houses horrid with bloodstain
          Gory uptowered; grief had offfrightened[3]
          Each of the wise ones who weened not that ever
          The folk-troop's defences 'gainst foes they should strengthen,
          'Gainst sprites and monsters. Through the might of the Wielder
       15 A doughty retainer hath a deed now accomplished
          Which erstwhile we all with our excellent wisdom

{If his mother yet liveth, well may she thank God for this son.}

          Failed to perform. May affirm very truly
          What woman soever in all of the nations
          Gave birth to the child, if yet she surviveth,
       20 That the long-ruling Lord was lavish to herward
          In the birth of the bairn. Now, Beowulf dear,

{Hereafter, Beowulf, thou shalt be my son.}

          Most excellent hero, I'll love thee in spirit
          As bairn of my body; bear well henceforward
          The relationship new. No lack shall befall thee
       25 Of earth-joys any I ever can give thee.
          Full often for lesser service I've given
[34]      Hero less hardy hoard-treasure precious,

{Thou hast won immortal distinction.}

          To a weaker in war-strife. By works of distinction
          Thou hast gained for thyself now that thy glory shall flourish
       30 Forever and ever. The All-Ruler quite thee
          With good from His hand as He hitherto did thee!"

{Beowulf replies: I was most happy to render thee this service.}

          Beowulf answered, Ecgtheow's offspring:
          "That labor of glory most gladly achieved we,
          The combat accomplished, unquailing we ventured
       35 The enemy's grapple; I would grant it much rather
          Thou wert able to look at the creature in person,
          Faint unto falling, the foe in his trappings!
          On murder-bed quickly I minded to bind him,
          With firm-holding fetters, that forced by my grapple
       40 Low he should lie in life-and-death struggle
          'Less his body escape; I was wholly unable,

{I could not keep the monster from escaping, as God did not will that I
should.}

          Since God did not will it, to keep him from going,
          Not held him that firmly, hated opposer;
          Too swift was the foeman. Yet safety regarding
       45 He suffered his hand behind him to linger,
          His arm and shoulder, to act as watcher;

{He left his hand and arm behind.}

          No shadow of solace the woe-begone creature
          Found him there nathless: the hated destroyer
          Liveth no longer, lashed for his evils,
       50 But sorrow hath seized him, in snare-meshes hath him
          Close in its clutches, keepeth him writhing
          In baleful bonds: there banished for evil
          The man shall wait for the mighty tribunal,

{God will give him his deserts.}

          How the God of glory shall give him his earnings."
       55 Then the soldier kept silent, son of old Ecglaf,

{Unferth has nothing more to say, for Beowulf's actions speak louder than
words.}

          From boasting and bragging of battle-achievements,
          Since the princes beheld there the hand that depended
          'Neath the lofty hall-timbers by the might of the nobleman,
          Each one before him, the enemy's fingers;
       60 Each finger-nail strong steel most resembled,
          The heathen one's hand-spur, the hero-in-battle's
          Claw most uncanny; quoth they agreeing,

[35]

{No sword will harm the monster.}

          That not any excellent edges of brave ones
          Was willing to touch him, the terrible creature's
       65 Battle-hand bloody to bear away from him.




{Heorot is adorned with hands.}

          Then straight was ordered that Heorot inside[1]
          With hands be embellished: a host of them gathered,
          Of men and women, who the wassailing-building
          The guest-hall begeared. Gold-flashing sparkled
        5 Webs on the walls then, of wonders a many
          To each of the heroes that look on such objects.

{The hall is defaced, however.}

          The beautiful building was broken to pieces
          Which all within with irons was fastened,
          Its hinges torn off: only the roof was
       10 Whole and uninjured when the horrible creature
          Outlawed for evil off had betaken him,
          Hopeless of living. 'Tis hard to avoid it

{[A vague passage of five verses.]}

          (Whoever will do it!); but he doubtless must come to[2]
          The place awaiting, as Wyrd hath appointed,
       15 Soul-bearers, earth-dwellers, earls under heaven,
          Where bound on its bed his body shall slumber

{Hrothgar goes to the banquet.}

          When feasting is finished. Full was the time then
          That the son of Healfdene went to the building;
[36]      The excellent atheling would eat of the banquet.
       20 Ne'er heard I that people with hero-band larger
          Bare them better tow'rds their bracelet-bestower.
          The laden-with-glory stooped to the bench then
          (Their kinsmen-companions in plenty were joyful,
          Many a cupful quaffing complaisantly),
       25 Doughty of spirit in the high-tow'ring palace,

{Hrothgar's nephew, Hrothulf, is present.}

          Hrothgar and Hrothulf. Heorot then inside
          Was filled with friendly ones; falsehood and treachery
          The Folk-Scyldings now nowise did practise.

{Hrothgar lavishes gifts upon Beowulf.}

          Then the offspring of Healfdene offered to Beowulf
       30 A golden standard, as reward for the victory,
          A banner embossed, burnie and helmet;
          Many men saw then a song-famous weapon
          Borne 'fore the hero. Beowulf drank of
          The cup in the building; that treasure-bestowing
       35 He needed not blush for in battle-men's presence.

{Four handsomer gifts were never presented.}

          Ne'er heard I that many men on the ale-bench
          In friendlier fashion to their fellows presented
          Four bright jewels with gold-work embellished.
          'Round the roof of the helmet a head-guarder outside
       40 Braided with wires, with bosses was furnished,
          That swords-for-the-battle fight-hardened might fail
          Boldly to harm him, when the hero proceeded

{Hrothgar commands that eight finely caparisoned steeds be brought to
Beowulf.}

          Forth against foemen. The defender of earls then
          Commanded that eight steeds with bridles
       45 Gold-plated, gleaming, be guided to hallward,
          Inside the building; on one of them stood then
          An art-broidered saddle embellished with jewels;
          'Twas the sovereign's seat, when the son of King Healfdene
          Was pleased to take part in the play of the edges;
       50 The famous one's valor ne'er failed at the front when
          Slain ones were bowing. And to Beowulf granted
          The prince of the Ingwins, power over both,
          O'er war-steeds and weapons; bade him well to enjoy them.
          In so manly a manner the mighty-famed chieftain,
[37]   55 Hoard-ward of heroes, with horses and jewels
          War-storms requited, that none e'er condemneth
          Who willeth to tell truth with full justice.




{Each of Beowulf's companions receives a costly gift.}

          And the atheling of earlmen to each of the heroes
          Who the ways of the waters went with Beowulf,
          A costly gift-token gave on the mead-bench,
          Offered an heirloom, and ordered that that man

{The warrior killed by Grendel is to be paid for in gold.}

        5 With gold should be paid for, whom Grendel had erstwhile
          Wickedly slaughtered, as he more of them had done
          Had far-seeing God and the mood of the hero
          The fate not averted: the Father then governed
          All of the earth-dwellers, as He ever is doing;
       10 Hence insight for all men is everywhere fittest,
          Forethought of spirit! much he shall suffer
          Of lief and of loathsome who long in this present
          Useth the world in this woful existence.
          There was music and merriment mingling together

{Hrothgar's scop recalls events in the reign of his lord's father.}

       15 Touching Healfdene's leader; the joy-wood was fingered,
          Measures recited, when the singer of Hrothgar
          On mead-bench should mention the merry hall-joyance
          Of the kinsmen of Finn, when onset surprised them:

{Hnæf, the Danish general, is treacherously attacked while staying at
Finn's castle.}

          "The Half-Danish hero, Hnæf of the Scyldings,
       20 On the field of the Frisians was fated to perish.
          Sure Hildeburg needed not mention approving
          The faith of the Jutemen: though blameless entirely,

{Queen Hildeburg is not only wife of Finn, but a kinswoman of the murdered
Hnæf.}

          When shields were shivered she was shorn of her darlings,
          Of bairns and brothers: they bent to their fate
       25 With war-spear wounded; woe was that woman.
          Not causeless lamented the daughter of Hoce
          The decree of the Wielder when morning-light came and
          She was able 'neath heaven to behold the destruction
[38]      Of brothers and bairns, where the brightest of earth-joys

{Finn's force is almost exterminated.}

       30 She had hitherto had: all the henchmen of Finn
          War had offtaken, save a handful remaining,
          That he nowise was able to offer resistance[1]

{Hengest succeeds Hnæf as Danish general.}

          To the onset of Hengest in the parley of battle,
          Nor the wretched remnant to rescue in war from
       35 The earl of the atheling; but they offered conditions,

{Compact between the Frisians and the Danes.}

          Another great building to fully make ready,
          A hall and a high-seat, that half they might rule with
          The sons of the Jutemen, and that Folcwalda's son would
          Day after day the Danemen honor
       40 When gifts were giving, and grant of his ring-store
          To Hengest's earl-troop ever so freely,
          Of his gold-plated jewels, as he encouraged the Frisians

{Equality of gifts agreed on.}

          On the bench of the beer-hall. On both sides they swore then
          A fast-binding compact; Finn unto Hengest
       45 With no thought of revoking vowed then most solemnly
          The woe-begone remnant well to take charge of,
          His Witan advising; the agreement should no one
          By words or works weaken and shatter,
          By artifice ever injure its value,
       50 Though reaved of their ruler their ring-giver's slayer
          They followed as vassals, Fate so requiring:

{No one shall refer to old grudges.}

          Then if one of the Frisians the quarrel should speak of
          In tones that were taunting, terrible edges
          Should cut in requital. Accomplished the oath was,
       55 And treasure of gold from the hoard was uplifted.

{Danish warriors are burned on a funeral-pyre.}

          The best of the Scylding braves was then fully
          Prepared for the pile; at the pyre was seen clearly
          The blood-gory burnie, the boar with his gilding,
          The iron-hard swine, athelings many
       60 Fatally wounded; no few had been slaughtered.
          Hildeburg bade then, at the burning of Hnæf,

[39]

{Queen Hildeburg has her son burnt along with Hnæf.}

          The bairn of her bosom to bear to the fire,
          That his body be burned and borne to the pyre.
          The woe-stricken woman wept on his shoulder,[2]
       65 In measures lamented; upmounted the hero.[3]
          The greatest of dead-fires curled to the welkin,
          On the hill's-front crackled; heads were a-melting,
          Wound-doors bursting, while the blood was a-coursing
          From body-bite fierce. The fire devoured them,
       70 Greediest of spirits, whom war had offcarried
          From both of the peoples; their bravest were fallen.




{The survivors go to Friesland, the home of Finn.}

          "Then the warriors departed to go to their dwellings,
          Reaved of their friends, Friesland to visit,
          Their homes and high-city. Hengest continued

{Hengest remains there all winter, unable to get away.}

          Biding with Finn the blood-tainted winter,
        5 Wholly unsundered;[1] of fatherland thought he
          Though unable to drive the ring-stemmèd vessel
[40]      O'er the ways of the waters; the wave-deeps were tossing,
          Fought with the wind; winter in ice-bonds
          Closed up the currents, till there came to the dwelling
       10 A year in its course, as yet it revolveth,
          If season propitious one alway regardeth,
          World-cheering weathers. Then winter was gone,
          Earth's bosom was lovely; the exile would get him,

{He devises schemes of vengeance.}

          The guest from the palace; on grewsomest vengeance
       15 He brooded more eager than on oversea journeys,
          Whe'r onset-of-anger he were able to 'complish,
          The bairns of the Jutemen therein to remember.
          Nowise refused he the duties of liegeman
          When Hun of the Frisians the battle-sword Láfing,
       20 Fairest of falchions, friendly did give him:
          Its edges were famous in folk-talk of Jutland.
          And savage sword-fury seized in its clutches
          Bold-mooded Finn where he bode in his palace,

{Guthlaf and Oslaf revenge Hnæf's slaughter.}

          When the grewsome grapple Guthlaf and Oslaf
       25 Had mournfully mentioned, the mere-journey over,
          For sorrows half-blamed him; the flickering spirit
          Could not bide in his bosom. Then the building was covered[2]

{Finn is slain.}

          With corpses of foemen, and Finn too was slaughtered,
          The king with his comrades, and the queen made a prisoner.

{The jewels of Finn, and his queen are carried away by the Danes.}

       30 The troops of the Scyldings bore to their vessels
          All that the land-king had in his palace,
          Such trinkets and treasures they took as, on searching,
          At Finn's they could find. They ferried to Daneland
          The excellent woman on oversea journey,

{The lay is concluded, and the main story is resumed.}

       35 Led her to their land-folk." The lay was concluded,
          The gleeman's recital. Shouts again rose then,
          Bench-glee resounded, bearers then offered

{Skinkers carry round the beaker.}

          Wine from wonder-vats. Wealhtheo advanced then
          Going 'neath gold-crown, where the good ones were seated

[41]

{Queen Wealhtheow greets Hrothgar, as he sits beside Hrothulf, his
nephew.}

       40 Uncle and nephew; their peace was yet mutual,
          True each to the other. And Unferth the spokesman
          Sat at the feet of the lord of the Scyldings:
          Each trusted his spirit that his mood was courageous,
          Though at fight he had failed in faith to his kinsmen.
       45 Said the queen of the Scyldings: "My lord and protector,
          Treasure-bestower, take thou this beaker;
          Joyance attend thee, gold-friend of heroes,

{Be generous to the Geats.}

          And greet thou the Geatmen with gracious responses!
          So ought one to do. Be kind to the Geatmen,
       50 In gifts not niggardly; anear and afar now
          Peace thou enjoyest. Report hath informed me
          Thou'lt have for a bairn the battle-brave hero.
          Now is Heorot cleansèd, ring-palace gleaming;

{Have as much joy as possible in thy hall, once more purified.}

          Give while thou mayest many rewards,
       55 And bequeath to thy kinsmen kingdom and people,
          On wending thy way to the Wielder's splendor.
          I know good Hrothulf, that the noble young troopers

{I know that Hrothulf will prove faithful if he survive thee.}

          He'll care for and honor, lord of the Scyldings,
          If earth-joys thou endest earlier than he doth;
       60 I reckon that recompense he'll render with kindness
          Our offspring and issue, if that all he remember,
          What favors of yore, when he yet was an infant,
          We awarded to him for his worship and pleasure."
          Then she turned by the bench where her sons were carousing,
       65 Hrethric and Hrothmund, and the heroes' offspring,

{Beowulf is sitting by the two royal sons.}

          The war-youth together; there the good one was sitting
          'Twixt the brothers twain, Beowulf Geatman.



{More gifts are offered Beowulf.}

          A beaker was borne him, and bidding to quaff it
          Graciously given, and gold that was twisted
          Pleasantly proffered, a pair of arm-jewels,
[42]      Rings and corslet, of collars the greatest
        5 I've heard of 'neath heaven. Of heroes not any
          More splendid from jewels have I heard 'neath the welkin,

{A famous necklace is referred to, in comparison with the gems presented
to Beowulf.}

          Since Hama off bore the Brosingmen's necklace,
          The bracteates and jewels, from the bright-shining city,[1]
          Eormenric's cunning craftiness fled from,
       10 Chose gain everlasting. Geatish Higelac,
          Grandson of Swerting, last had this jewel
          When tramping 'neath banner the treasure he guarded,
          The field-spoil defended; Fate offcarried him
          When for deeds of daring he endured tribulation,
       15 Hate from the Frisians; the ornaments bare he
          O'er the cup of the currents, costly gem-treasures,
          Mighty folk-leader, he fell 'neath his target;
          The[2] corpse of the king then came into charge of
          The race of the Frankmen, the mail-shirt and collar:
       20 Warmen less noble plundered the fallen,
          When the fight was finished; the folk of the Geatmen
          The field of the dead held in possession.
          The choicest of mead-halls with cheering resounded.
          Wealhtheo discoursed, the war-troop addressed she:

{Queen Wealhtheow magnifies Beowulf's achievements.}

       25 "This collar enjoy thou, Beowulf worthy,
          Young man, in safety, and use thou this armor,
          Gems of the people, and prosper thou fully,
          Show thyself sturdy and be to these liegemen
          Mild with instruction! I'll mind thy requital.
       30 Thou hast brought it to pass that far and near
          Forever and ever earthmen shall honor thee,
          Even so widely as ocean surroundeth
          The blustering bluffs. Be, while thou livest,
[43]      A wealth-blessèd atheling. I wish thee most truly

{May gifts never fail thee.}

       35 Jewels and treasure. Be kind to my son, thou
          Living in joyance! Here each of the nobles
          Is true unto other, gentle in spirit,
          Loyal to leader. The liegemen are peaceful,
          The war-troops ready: well-drunken heroes,[3]
       40 Do as I bid ye." Then she went to the settle.
          There was choicest of banquets, wine drank the heroes:

{They little know of the sorrow in store for them.}

          Weird they knew not, destiny cruel,
          As to many an earlman early it happened,
          When evening had come and Hrothgar had parted
       45 Off to his manor, the mighty to slumber.
          Warriors unnumbered warded the building
          As erst they did often: the ale-settle bared they,
          'Twas covered all over with beds and pillows.

{A doomed thane is there with them.}

          Doomed unto death, down to his slumber
       50 Bowed then a beer-thane. Their battle-shields placed they,
          Bright-shining targets, up by their heads then;
          O'er the atheling on ale-bench 'twas easy to see there
          Battle-high helmet, burnie of ring-mail,

{They were always ready for battle.}

          And mighty war-spear. 'Twas the wont of that people
       55 To constantly keep them equipped for the battle,[4]
          At home or marching--in either condition--
          At seasons just such as necessity ordered
          As best for their ruler; that people was worthy.

 

          They sank then to slumber. With sorrow one paid for
          His evening repose, as often betid them
          While Grendel was holding[1] the gold-bedecked palace,
          Ill-deeds performing, till his end overtook him,
        5 Death for his sins. 'Twas seen very clearly,

{Grendel's mother is known to be thirsting for revenge.}

          Known unto earth-folk, that still an avenger
          Outlived the loathed one, long since the sorrow
          Caused by the struggle; the mother of Grendel,
          Devil-shaped woman, her woe ever minded,
       10 Who was held to inhabit the horrible waters,

{[Grendel's progenitor, Cain, is again referred to.]}

          The cold-flowing currents, after Cain had become a
          Slayer-with-edges to his one only brother,
          The son of his sire; he set out then banished,
          Marked as a murderer, man-joys avoiding,
       15 Lived in the desert. Thence demons unnumbered

{The poet again magnifies Beowulf's valor.}

          Fate-sent awoke; one of them Grendel,
          Sword-cursèd, hateful, who at Heorot met with
          A man that was watching, waiting the struggle,
          Where a horrid one held him with hand-grapple sturdy;
       20 Nathless he minded the might of his body,
          The glorious gift God had allowed him,
          And folk-ruling Father's favor relied on,
          His help and His comfort: so he conquered the foeman,
          The hell-spirit humbled: he unhappy departed then,
       25 Reaved of his joyance, journeying to death-haunts,
          Foeman of man. His mother moreover

{Grendel's mother comes to avenge her son.}

          Eager and gloomy was anxious to go on
          Her mournful mission, mindful of vengeance
          For the death of her son. She came then to Heorot
[45]   30 Where the Armor-Dane earlmen all through the building
          Were lying in slumber. Soon there became then
          Return[2] to the nobles, when the mother of Grendel
          Entered the folk-hall; the fear was less grievous
          By even so much as the vigor of maidens,
       35 War-strength of women, by warrior is reckoned,
          When well-carved weapon, worked with the hammer,
          Blade very bloody, brave with its edges,
          Strikes down the boar-sign that stands on the helmet.
          Then the hard-edgèd weapon was heaved in the building,[3]
       40 The brand o'er the benches, broad-lindens many
          Hand-fast were lifted; for helmet he recked not,
          For armor-net broad, whom terror laid hold of.
          She went then hastily, outward would get her
          Her life for to save, when some one did spy her;

{She seizes a favorite liegemen of Hrothgar's.}

       45 Soon she had grappled one of the athelings
          Fast and firmly, when fenward she hied her;
          That one to Hrothgar was liefest of heroes
          In rank of retainer where waters encircle,
          A mighty shield-warrior, whom she murdered at slumber,
       50 A broadly-famed battle-knight. Beowulf was absent,

{Beowulf was asleep in another part of the palace.}

          But another apartment was erstwhile devoted
          To the glory-decked Geatman when gold was distributed.
          There was hubbub in Heorot. The hand that was famous
          She grasped in its gore;[4] grief was renewed then
[46]   55 In homes and houses: 'twas no happy arrangement
          In both of the quarters to barter and purchase
          With lives of their friends. Then the well-agèd ruler,
          The gray-headed war-thane, was woful in spirit,
          When his long-trusted liegeman lifeless he knew of,

{Beowulf is sent for.}

       60 His dearest one gone. Quick from a room was
          Beowulf brought, brave and triumphant.
          As day was dawning in the dusk of the morning,

{He comes at Hrothgar's summons.}

          Went then that earlman, champion noble,
          Came with comrades, where the clever one bided
       65 Whether God all gracious would grant him a respite
          After the woe he had suffered. The war-worthy hero
          With a troop of retainers trod then the pavement
          (The hall-building groaned), till he greeted the wise one,

{Beowulf inquires how Hrothgar had enjoyed his night's rest.}

          The earl of the Ingwins;[5] asked if the night had
       70 Fully refreshed him, as fain he would have it.








{Hrothgar laments the death of Æschere, his shoulder-companion.}

          Hrothgar rejoined, helm of the Scyldings:
          "Ask not of joyance! Grief is renewed to
          The folk of the Danemen. Dead is Æschere,
          Yrmenlaf's brother, older than he,
        5 My true-hearted counsellor, trusty adviser,
          Shoulder-companion, when fighting in battle
          Our heads we protected, when troopers were clashing,

{He was my ideal hero.}

          And heroes were dashing; such an earl should be ever,
          An erst-worthy atheling, as Æschere proved him.
       10 The flickering death-spirit became in Heorot
          His hand-to-hand murderer; I can not tell whither
          The cruel one turned in the carcass exulting,

[47]

{This horrible creature came to avenge Grendel's death.}

          By cramming discovered.[1] The quarrel she wreaked then,
          That last night igone Grendel thou killedst
       15 In grewsomest manner, with grim-holding clutches,
          Since too long he had lessened my liege-troop and wasted
          My folk-men so foully. He fell in the battle
          With forfeit of life, and another has followed,
          A mighty crime-worker, her kinsman avenging,
       20 And henceforth hath 'stablished her hatred unyielding,[2]
          As it well may appear to many a liegeman,
          Who mourneth in spirit the treasure-bestower,
          Her heavy heart-sorrow; the hand is now lifeless
          Which[3] availed you in every wish that you cherished.

{I have heard my vassals speak of these two uncanny monsters who lived in
the moors.}

       25 Land-people heard I, liegemen, this saying,
          Dwellers in halls, they had seen very often
          A pair of such mighty march-striding creatures,
          Far-dwelling spirits, holding the moorlands:
          One of them wore, as well they might notice,
       30 The image of woman, the other one wretched
          In guise of a man wandered in exile,
          Except he was huger than any of earthmen;
          Earth-dwelling people entitled him Grendel
          In days of yore: they know not their father,
       35 Whe'r ill-going spirits any were borne him

{The inhabit the most desolate and horrible places.}

          Ever before. They guard the wolf-coverts,
          Lands inaccessible, wind-beaten nesses,
          Fearfullest fen-deeps, where a flood from the mountains
          'Neath mists of the nesses netherward rattles,
       40 The stream under earth: not far is it henceward
          Measured by mile-lengths that the mere-water standeth,
          Which forests hang over, with frost-whiting covered,[4]
[48]      A firm-rooted forest, the floods overshadow.
          There ever at night one an ill-meaning portent
       45 A fire-flood may see; 'mong children of men
          None liveth so wise that wot of the bottom;
          Though harassed by hounds the heath-stepper seek for,

{Even the hounded deer will not seek refuge in these uncanny regions.}

          Fly to the forest, firm-antlered he-deer,
          Spurred from afar, his spirit he yieldeth,
       50 His life on the shore, ere in he will venture
          To cover his head. Uncanny the place is:
          Thence upward ascendeth the surging of waters,
          Wan to the welkin, when the wind is stirring
          The weathers unpleasing, till the air groweth gloomy,

{To thee only can I look for assistance.}

       55 And the heavens lower. Now is help to be gotten
          From thee and thee only! The abode thou know'st not,
          The dangerous place where thou'rt able to meet with
          The sin-laden hero: seek if thou darest!
          For the feud I will fully fee thee with money,
       60 With old-time treasure, as erstwhile I did thee,
          With well-twisted jewels, if away thou shalt get thee."



          Beowulf answered, Ecgtheow's son:

{Beowulf exhorts the old king to arouse himself for action.}

          "Grieve not, O wise one! for each it is better,
          His friend to avenge than with vehemence wail him;
          Each of us must the end-day abide of
        5 His earthly existence; who is able accomplish
          Glory ere death! To battle-thane noble
          Lifeless lying, 'tis at last most fitting.
          Arise, O king, quick let us hasten
          To look at the footprint of the kinsman of Grendel!
       10 I promise thee this now: to his place he'll escape not,
          To embrace of the earth, nor to mountainous forest,
          Nor to depths of the ocean, wherever he wanders.
[49]      Practice thou now patient endurance
          Of each of thy sorrows, as I hope for thee soothly!"

{Hrothgar rouses himself. His horse is brought.}

       15 Then up sprang the old one, the All-Wielder thanked he,
          Ruler Almighty, that the man had outspoken.
          Then for Hrothgar a war-horse was decked with a bridle,
          Curly-maned courser. The clever folk-leader

{They start on the track of the female monster.}

          Stately proceeded: stepped then an earl-troop
       20 Of linden-wood bearers. Her footprints were seen then
          Widely in wood-paths, her way o'er the bottoms,
          Where she faraway fared o'er fen-country murky,
          Bore away breathless the best of retainers
          Who pondered with Hrothgar the welfare of country.
       25 The son of the athelings then went o'er the stony,
          Declivitous cliffs, the close-covered passes,
          Narrow passages, paths unfrequented,
          Nesses abrupt, nicker-haunts many;
          One of a few of wise-mooded heroes,
       30 He onward advanced to view the surroundings,
          Till he found unawares woods of the mountain
          O'er hoar-stones hanging, holt-wood unjoyful;
          The water stood under, welling and gory.
          'Twas irksome in spirit to all of the Danemen,
       35 Friends of the Scyldings, to many a liegeman

{The sight of Æschere's head causes them great sorrow.}

          Sad to be suffered, a sorrow unlittle
          To each of the earlmen, when to Æschere's head they
          Came on the cliff. The current was seething
          With blood and with gore (the troopers gazed on it).
       40 The horn anon sang the battle-song ready.
          The troop were all seated; they saw 'long the water then

{The water is filled with serpents and sea-dragons.}

          Many a serpent, mere-dragons wondrous
          Trying the waters, nickers a-lying
          On the cliffs of the nesses, which at noonday full often
       45 Go on the sea-deeps their sorrowful journey,
          Wild-beasts and wormkind; away then they hastened

{One of them is killed by Beowulf.}

          Hot-mooded, hateful, they heard the great clamor,
          The war-trumpet winding. One did the Geat-prince
[50]      Sunder from earth-joys, with arrow from bowstring,
       50 From his sea-struggle tore him, that the trusty war-missile

{The dead beast is a poor swimmer}

          Pierced to his vitals; he proved in the currents
          Less doughty at swimming whom death had offcarried.
          Soon in the waters the wonderful swimmer
          Was straitened most sorely with sword-pointed boar-spears,
       55 Pressed in the battle and pulled to the cliff-edge;
          The liegemen then looked on the loath-fashioned stranger.

{Beowulf prepares for a struggle with the monster.}

          Beowulf donned then his battle-equipments,
          Cared little for life; inlaid and most ample,
          The hand-woven corslet which could cover his body,
       60 Must the wave-deeps explore, that war might be powerless
          To harm the great hero, and the hating one's grasp might
          Not peril his safety; his head was protected
          By the light-flashing helmet that should mix with the bottoms,
          Trying the eddies, treasure-emblazoned,
       65 Encircled with jewels, as in seasons long past
          The weapon-smith worked it, wondrously made it,
          With swine-bodies fashioned it, that thenceforward no longer
          Brand might bite it, and battle-sword hurt it.
          And that was not least of helpers in prowess

{He has Unferth's sword in his hand.}

       70 That Hrothgar's spokesman had lent him when straitened;
          And the hilted hand-sword was Hrunting entitled,
          Old and most excellent 'mong all of the treasures;
          Its blade was of iron, blotted with poison,
          Hardened with gore; it failed not in battle
       75 Any hero under heaven in hand who it brandished,
          Who ventured to take the terrible journeys,
          The battle-field sought; not the earliest occasion
          That deeds of daring 'twas destined to 'complish.

{Unferth has little use for swords.}

          Ecglaf's kinsman minded not soothly,
       80 Exulting in strength, what erst he had spoken
          Drunken with wine, when the weapon he lent to
          A sword-hero bolder; himself did not venture
          'Neath the strife of the currents his life to endanger,
[51]      To fame-deeds perform; there he forfeited glory,
       85 Repute for his strength. Not so with the other
          When he clad in his corslet had equipped him for battle.







{Beowulf makes a parting speech to Hrothgar.}

          Beowulf spake, Ecgtheow's son:
          "Recall now, oh, famous kinsman of Healfdene,
          Prince very prudent, now to part I am ready,
          Gold-friend of earlmen, what erst we agreed on,

{If I fail, act as a kind liegelord to my thanes,}

        5 Should I lay down my life in lending thee assistance,
          When my earth-joys were over, thou wouldst evermore serve me
          In stead of a father; my faithful thanemen,
          My trusty retainers, protect thou and care for,
          Fall I in battle: and, Hrothgar belovèd,

{and send Higelac the jewels thou hast given me}

       10 Send unto Higelac the high-valued jewels
          Thou to me hast allotted. The lord of the Geatmen
          May perceive from the gold, the Hrethling may see it

{I should like my king to know how generous a lord I found thee to be.}

          When he looks on the jewels, that a gem-giver found I
          Good over-measure, enjoyed him while able.
       15 And the ancient heirloom Unferth permit thou,
          The famed one to have, the heavy-sword splendid[1]
          The hard-edgèd weapon; with Hrunting to aid me,
          I shall gain me glory, or grim-death shall take me."

{Beowulf is eager for the fray.}

          The atheling of Geatmen uttered these words and
       20 Heroic did hasten, not any rejoinder
          Was willing to wait for; the wave-current swallowed

{He is a whole day reaching the bottom of the sea.}

          The doughty-in-battle. Then a day's-length elapsed ere
          He was able to see the sea at its bottom.
          Early she found then who fifty of winters
       25 The course of the currents kept in her fury,
          Grisly and greedy, that the grim one's dominion

[52]

{Grendel's mother knows that some one has reached her domains.}

          Some one of men from above was exploring.
          Forth did she grab them, grappled the warrior
          With horrible clutches; yet no sooner she injured
       30 His body unscathèd: the burnie out-guarded,
          That she proved but powerless to pierce through the armor,
          The limb-mail locked, with loath-grabbing fingers.
          The sea-wolf bare then, when bottomward came she,

{She grabs him, and bears him to her den.}

          The ring-prince homeward, that he after was powerless
       35 (He had daring to do it) to deal with his weapons,
          But many a mere-beast tormented him swimming,

{Sea-monsters bite and strike him.}

          Flood-beasts no few with fierce-biting tusks did
          Break through his burnie, the brave one pursued they.
          The earl then discovered he was down in some cavern
       40 Where no water whatever anywise harmed him,
          And the clutch of the current could come not anear him,
          Since the roofed-hall prevented; brightness a-gleaming
          Fire-light he saw, flashing resplendent.
          The good one saw then the sea-bottom's monster,

{Beowulf attacks the mother of Grendel.}

       45 The mighty mere-woman; he made a great onset
          With weapon-of-battle, his hand not desisted
          From striking, that war-blade struck on her head then
          A battle-song greedy. The stranger perceived then

{The sword will not bite.}

          The sword would not bite, her life would not injure,
       50 But the falchion failed the folk-prince when straitened:
          Erst had it often onsets encountered,
          Oft cloven the helmet, the fated one's armor:
          'Twas the first time that ever the excellent jewel
          Had failed of its fame. Firm-mooded after,
       55 Not heedless of valor, but mindful of glory,
          Was Higelac's kinsman; the hero-chief angry
          Cast then his carved-sword covered with jewels
          That it lay on the earth, hard and steel-pointed;

{The hero throws down all weapons, and again trusts to his hand-grip.}

          He hoped in his strength, his hand-grapple sturdy.
       60 So any must act whenever he thinketh
          To gain him in battle glory unending,
          And is reckless of living. The lord of the War-Geats
[53]      (He shrank not from battle) seized by the shoulder[2]
          The mother of Grendel; then mighty in struggle
       65 Swung he his enemy, since his anger was kindled,
          That she fell to the floor. With furious grapple

{Beowulf falls.}

          She gave him requital[3] early thereafter,
          And stretched out to grab him; the strongest of warriors
          Faint-mooded stumbled, till he fell in his traces,

{The monster sits on him with drawn sword.}

       70 Foot-going champion. Then she sat on the hall-guest
          And wielded her war-knife wide-bladed, flashing,
          For her son would take vengeance, her one only bairn.

{His armor saves his life.}

          His breast-armor woven bode on his shoulder;
          It guarded his life, the entrance defended
       75 'Gainst sword-point and edges. Ecgtheow's son there
          Had fatally journeyed, champion of Geatmen,
          In the arms of the ocean, had the armor not given,
          Close-woven corslet, comfort and succor,

{God arranged for his escape.}

          And had God most holy not awarded the victory,
       80 All-knowing Lord; easily did heaven's
          Ruler most righteous arrange it with justice;[4]
          Uprose he erect ready for battle.







{Beowulf grasps a giant-sword,}

          Then he saw mid the war-gems a weapon of victory,
          An ancient giant-sword, of edges a-doughty,
          Glory of warriors: of weapons 'twas choicest,
          Only 'twas larger than any man else was
[54]    5 Able to bear to the battle-encounter,
          The good and splendid work of the giants.
          He grasped then the sword-hilt, knight of the Scyldings,
          Bold and battle-grim, brandished his ring-sword,
          Hopeless of living, hotly he smote her,
       10 That the fiend-woman's neck firmly it grappled,

{and fells the female monster.}

          Broke through her bone-joints, the bill fully pierced her
          Fate-cursèd body, she fell to the ground then:
          The hand-sword was bloody, the hero exulted.
          The brand was brilliant, brightly it glimmered,
       15 Just as from heaven gemlike shineth
          The torch of the firmament. He glanced 'long the building,
          And turned by the wall then, Higelac's vassal
          Raging and wrathful raised his battle-sword
          Strong by the handle. The edge was not useless
       20 To the hero-in-battle, but he speedily wished to
          Give Grendel requital for the many assaults he
          Had worked on the West-Danes not once, but often,
          When he slew in slumber the subjects of Hrothgar,
          Swallowed down fifteen sleeping retainers
       25 Of the folk of the Danemen, and fully as many
          Carried away, a horrible prey.
          He gave him requital, grim-raging champion,

{Beowulf sees the body of Grendel, and cuts off his head.}

          When he saw on his rest-place weary of conflict
          Grendel lying, of life-joys bereavèd,
       30 As the battle at Heorot erstwhile had scathed him;
          His body far bounded, a blow when he suffered,
          Death having seized him, sword-smiting heavy,
          And he cut off his head then. Early this noticed
          The clever carles who as comrades of Hrothgar

{The waters are gory.}

       35 Gazed on the sea-deeps, that the surging wave-currents
          Were mightily mingled, the mere-flood was gory:
          Of the good one the gray-haired together held converse,

{Beowulf is given up for dead.}

          The hoary of head, that they hoped not to see again
          The atheling ever, that exulting in victory
       40 He'd return there to visit the distinguished folk-ruler:
[55]      Then many concluded the mere-wolf had killed him.[1]
          The ninth hour came then. From the ness-edge departed
          The bold-mooded Scyldings; the gold-friend of heroes
          Homeward betook him. The strangers sat down then
       45 Soul-sick, sorrowful, the sea-waves regarding:
          They wished and yet weened not their well-loved friend-lord

{The giant-sword melts.}

          To see any more. The sword-blade began then,
          The blood having touched it, contracting and shriveling
          With battle-icicles; 'twas a wonderful marvel
       50 That it melted entirely, likest to ice when
          The Father unbindeth the bond of the frost and
          Unwindeth the wave-bands, He who wieldeth dominion
          Of times and of tides: a truth-firm Creator.
          Nor took he of jewels more in the dwelling,
       55 Lord of the Weders, though they lay all around him,
          Than the head and the handle handsome with jewels;
[56]      The brand early melted, burnt was the weapon:[2]
          So hot was the blood, the strange-spirit poisonous

{The hero swims back to the realms of day.}

          That in it did perish. He early swam off then
       60 Who had bided in combat the carnage of haters,
          Went up through the ocean; the eddies were cleansèd,
          The spacious expanses, when the spirit from farland
          His life put aside and this short-lived existence.
          The seamen's defender came swimming to land then
       65 Doughty of spirit, rejoiced in his sea-gift,
          The bulky burden which he bore in his keeping.
          The excellent vassals advanced then to meet him,
          To God they were grateful, were glad in their chieftain,
          That to see him safe and sound was granted them.
       70 From the high-minded hero, then, helmet and burnie
          Were speedily loosened: the ocean was putrid,
          The water 'neath welkin weltered with gore.
          Forth did they fare, then, their footsteps retracing,
          Merry and mirthful, measured the earth-way,
       75 The highway familiar: men very daring[3]
          Bare then the head from the sea-cliff, burdening
          Each of the earlmen, excellent-valiant.

{It takes four men to carry Grendel's head on a spear.}

          Four of them had to carry with labor
          The head of Grendel to the high towering gold-hall
       80 Upstuck on the spear, till fourteen most-valiant
          And battle-brave Geatmen came there going
          Straight to the palace: the prince of the people
          Measured the mead-ways, their mood-brave companion.
          The atheling of earlmen entered the building,
       85 Deed-valiant man, adorned with distinction,
          Doughty shield-warrior, to address King Hrothgar:
[57]      Then hung by the hair, the head of Grendel
          Was borne to the building, where beer-thanes were drinking,
          Loth before earlmen and eke 'fore the lady:
       90 The warriors beheld then a wonderful sight.



{Beowulf relates his last exploit.}

          Beowulf spake, offspring of Ecgtheow:
          "Lo! we blithely have brought thee, bairn of Healfdene,
          Prince of the Scyldings, these presents from ocean
          Which thine eye looketh on, for an emblem of glory.
        5 I came off alive from this, narrowly 'scaping:
          In war 'neath the water the work with great pains I
          Performed, and the fight had been finished quite nearly,
          Had God not defended me. I failed in the battle
          Aught to accomplish, aided by Hrunting,
       10 Though that weapon was worthy, but the Wielder of earth-folk

{God was fighting with me.}

          Gave me willingly to see on the wall a
          Heavy old hand-sword hanging in splendor
          (He guided most often the lorn and the friendless),
          That I swung as a weapon. The wards of the house then
       15 I killed in the conflict (when occasion was given me).
          Then the battle-sword burned, the brand that was lifted,[1]
          As the blood-current sprang, hottest of war-sweats;
          Seizing the hilt, from my foes I offbore it;
          I avenged as I ought to their acts of malignity,
       20 The murder of Danemen. I then make thee this promise,

{Heorot is freed from monsters.}

          Thou'lt be able in Heorot careless to slumber
          With thy throng of heroes and the thanes of thy people
          Every and each, of greater and lesser,
          And thou needest not fear for them from the selfsame direction
       25 As thou formerly fearedst, oh, folk-lord of Scyldings,
[58]     End-day for earlmen." To the age-hoary man then,

{The famous sword is presented to Hrothgar.}

          The gray-haired chieftain, the gold-fashioned sword-hilt,
          Old-work of giants, was thereupon given;
          Since the fall of the fiends, it fell to the keeping
       30 Of the wielder of Danemen, the wonder-smith's labor,
          And the bad-mooded being abandoned this world then,
          Opponent of God, victim of murder,
          And also his mother; it went to the keeping
          Of the best of the world-kings, where waters encircle,
       35 Who the scot divided in Scylding dominion.

{Hrothgar looks closely at the old sword.}

          Hrothgar discoursed, the hilt he regarded,
          The ancient heirloom where an old-time contention's
          Beginning was graven: the gurgling currents,
          The flood slew thereafter the race of the giants,
       40 They had proved themselves daring: that people was loth to

{It had belonged to a race hateful to God.}

          The Lord everlasting, through lash of the billows
          The Father gave them final requital.
          So in letters of rune on the clasp of the handle
          Gleaming and golden, 'twas graven exactly,
       45 Set forth and said, whom that sword had been made for,
          Finest of irons, who first it was wrought for,
          Wreathed at its handle and gleaming with serpents.
          The wise one then said (silent they all were)

{Hrothgar praises Beowulf.}

          Son of old Healfdene: "He may say unrefuted
       50 Who performs 'mid the folk-men fairness and truth
          (The hoary old ruler remembers the past),
          That better by birth is this bairn of the nobles!
          Thy fame is extended through far-away countries,
          Good friend Beowulf, o'er all of the races,
       55 Thou holdest all firmly, hero-like strength with
          Prudence of spirit. I'll prove myself grateful
          As before we agreed on; thou granted for long shalt
          Become a great comfort to kinsmen and comrades,

{Heremod's career is again contrasted with Beowulf's.}

          A help unto heroes. Heremod became not
       60 Such to the Scyldings, successors of Ecgwela;
          He grew not to please them, but grievous destruction,
[59]      And diresome death-woes to Danemen attracted;
          He slew in anger his table-companions,
          Trustworthy counsellors, till he turned off lonely
       65 From world-joys away, wide-famous ruler:
          Though high-ruling heaven in hero-strength raised him,
          In might exalted him, o'er men of all nations
          Made him supreme, yet a murderous spirit
          Grew in his bosom: he gave then no ring-gems

{A wretched failure of a king, to give no jewels to his retainers.}

       70 To the Danes after custom; endured he unjoyful
          Standing the straits from strife that was raging,
          Longsome folk-sorrow. Learn then from this,
          Lay hold of virtue! Though laden with winters,
          I have sung thee these measures. 'Tis a marvel to tell it,

{Hrothgar moralizes.}

       75 How all-ruling God from greatness of spirit
          Giveth wisdom to children of men,
          Manor and earlship: all things He ruleth.
          He often permitteth the mood-thought of man of
          The illustrious lineage to lean to possessions,
       80 Allows him earthly delights at his manor,
          A high-burg of heroes to hold in his keeping,
          Maketh portions of earth-folk hear him,
          And a wide-reaching kingdom so that, wisdom failing him,
          He himself is unable to reckon its boundaries;
       85 He liveth in luxury, little debars him,
          Nor sickness nor age, no treachery-sorrow
          Becloudeth his spirit, conflict nowhere,
          No sword-hate, appeareth, but all of the world doth
          Wend as he wisheth; the worse he knoweth not,
       90 Till arrant arrogance inward pervading,
          Waxeth and springeth, when the warder is sleeping,
          The guard of the soul: with sorrows encompassed,
          Too sound is his slumber, the slayer is near him,
          Who with bow and arrow aimeth in malice.




{A wounded spirit.}

          "Then bruised in his bosom he with bitter-toothed missile
          Is hurt 'neath his helmet: from harmful pollution
          He is powerless to shield him by the wonderful mandates
          Of the loath-cursèd spirit; what too long he hath holden
        5 Him seemeth too small, savage he hoardeth,
          Nor boastfully giveth gold-plated rings,[1]
          The fate of the future flouts and forgetteth
          Since God had erst given him greatness no little,
          Wielder of Glory. His end-day anear,
       10 It afterward happens that the bodily-dwelling
          Fleetingly fadeth, falls into ruins;
          Another lays hold who doleth the ornaments,
          The nobleman's jewels, nothing lamenting,
          Heedeth no terror. Oh, Beowulf dear,
       15 Best of the heroes, from bale-strife defend thee,
          And choose thee the better, counsels eternal;

{Be not over proud: life is fleeting, and its strength soon wasteth away.}

          Beware of arrogance, world-famous champion!
          But a little-while lasts thy life-vigor's fulness;
          'Twill after hap early, that illness or sword-edge
       20 Shall part thee from strength, or the grasp of the fire,
          Or the wave of the current, or clutch of the edges,
          Or flight of the war-spear, or age with its horrors,
          Or thine eyes' bright flashing shall fade into darkness:
          'Twill happen full early, excellent hero,

{Hrothgar gives an account of his reign.}

       25 That death shall subdue thee. So the Danes a half-century
          I held under heaven, helped them in struggles
          'Gainst many a race in middle-earth's regions,
          With ash-wood and edges, that enemies none
          On earth molested me. Lo! offsetting change, now,

[61]

{Sorrow after joy.}

       30 Came to my manor, grief after joyance,
          When Grendel became my constant visitor,
          Inveterate hater: I from that malice
          Continually travailed with trouble no little.
          Thanks be to God that I gained in my lifetime,
       35 To the Lord everlasting, to look on the gory
          Head with mine eyes, after long-lasting sorrow!
          Go to the bench now, battle-adornèd
          Joy in the feasting: of jewels in common
          We'll meet with many when morning appeareth."
       40 The Geatman was gladsome, ganged he immediately
          To go to the bench, as the clever one bade him.
          Then again as before were the famous-for-prowess,
          Hall-inhabiters, handsomely banqueted,
          Feasted anew. The night-veil fell then
       45 Dark o'er the warriors. The courtiers rose then;
          The gray-haired was anxious to go to his slumbers,
          The hoary old Scylding. Hankered the Geatman,

{Beowulf is fagged, and seeks rest.}

          The champion doughty, greatly, to rest him:
          An earlman early outward did lead him,
       50 Fagged from his faring, from far-country springing,
          Who for etiquette's sake all of a liegeman's
          Needs regarded, such as seamen at that time
          Were bounden to feel. The big-hearted rested;
          The building uptowered, spacious and gilded,
       55 The guest within slumbered, till the sable-clad raven
          Blithely foreboded the beacon of heaven.
          Then the bright-shining sun o'er the bottoms came going;[2]
          The warriors hastened, the heads of the peoples
          Were ready to go again to their peoples,

{The Geats prepare to leave Dane-land.}

       60 The high-mooded farer would faraway thenceward
          Look for his vessel. The valiant one bade then,[3]

[62]

{Unferth asks Beowulf to accept his sword as a gift. Beowulf thanks him.}

          Offspring of Ecglaf, off to bear Hrunting,
          To take his weapon, his well-beloved iron;
          He him thanked for the gift, saying good he accounted
       65 The war-friend and mighty, nor chid he with words then
          The blade of the brand: 'twas a brave-mooded hero.
          When the warriors were ready, arrayed in their trappings,
          The atheling dear to the Danemen advanced then
          On to the dais, where the other was sitting,
       70 Grim-mooded hero, greeted King Hrothgar.




{Beowulf's farewell.}

          Beowulf spake, Ecgtheow's offspring:
          "We men of the water wish to declare now
          Fared from far-lands, we're firmly determined
          To seek King Higelac. Here have we fitly
        5 Been welcomed and feasted, as heart would desire it;
          Good was the greeting. If greater affection
          I am anywise able ever on earth to
          Gain at thy hands, ruler of heroes,
          Than yet I have done, I shall quickly be ready

{I shall be ever ready to aid thee.}

       10 For combat and conflict. O'er the course of the waters
          Learn I that neighbors alarm thee with terror,
          As haters did whilom, I hither will bring thee
          For help unto heroes henchmen by thousands.

{My liegelord will encourage me in aiding thee.}

          I know as to Higelac, the lord of the Geatmen,
       15 Though young in years, he yet will permit me,
          By words and by works, ward of the people,
          Fully to furnish thee forces and bear thee
          My lance to relieve thee, if liegemen shall fail thee,
          And help of my hand-strength; if Hrethric be treating,
[63]   20 Bairn of the king, at the court of the Geatmen,
          He thereat may find him friends in abundance:
          Faraway countries he were better to seek for
          Who trusts in himself." Hrothgar discoursed then,
          Making rejoinder: "These words thou hast uttered
       25 All-knowing God hath given thy spirit!

{O Beowulf, thou art wise beyond thy years.}

          Ne'er heard I an earlman thus early in life
          More clever in speaking: thou'rt cautious of spirit,
          Mighty of muscle, in mouth-answers prudent.
          I count on the hope that, happen it ever
       30 That missile shall rob thee of Hrethel's descendant,
          Edge-horrid battle, and illness or weapon
          Deprive thee of prince, of people's protector,

{Should Higelac die, the Geats could find no better successor than thou
wouldst make.}

          And life thou yet holdest, the Sea-Geats will never
          Find a more fitting folk-lord to choose them,
       35 Gem-ward of heroes, than _thou_ mightest prove thee,
          If the kingdom of kinsmen thou carest to govern.
          Thy mood-spirit likes me the longer the better,
          Beowulf dear: thou hast brought it to pass that
          To both these peoples peace shall be common,

{Thou hast healed the ancient breach between our races.}

       40 To Geat-folk and Danemen, the strife be suspended,
          The secret assailings they suffered in yore-days;
          And also that jewels be shared while I govern
          The wide-stretching kingdom, and that many shall visit
          Others o'er the ocean with excellent gift-gems:
       45 The ring-adorned bark shall bring o'er the currents
          Presents and love-gifts. This people I know
          Tow'rd foeman and friend firmly established,[1]
          After ancient etiquette everywise blameless."
          Then the warden of earlmen gave him still farther,

{Parting gifts}

       50 Kinsman of Healfdene, a dozen of jewels,
          Bade him safely seek with the presents
          His well-beloved people, early returning.

[64]

{Hrothgar kisses Beowulf, and weeps.}

          Then the noble-born king kissed the distinguished,
          Dear-lovèd liegeman, the Dane-prince saluted him,
       55 And claspèd his neck; tears from him fell,
          From the gray-headed man: he two things expected,
          Agèd and reverend, but rather the second,
          [2]That bold in council they'd meet thereafter.
          The man was so dear that he failed to suppress the
       60 Emotions that moved him, but in mood-fetters fastened

{The old king is deeply grieved to part with his benefactor.}

          The long-famous hero longeth in secret
          Deep in his spirit for the dear-beloved man
          Though not a blood-kinsman. Beowulf thenceward,
          Gold-splendid warrior, walked o'er the meadows
       65 Exulting in treasure: the sea-going vessel
          Riding at anchor awaited its owner.
          As they pressed on their way then, the present of Hrothgar

{Giving liberally is the true proof of kingship.}

          Was frequently referred to: a folk-king indeed that
          Everyway blameless, till age did debar him
       70 The joys of his might, which hath many oft injured.




          Then the band of very valiant retainers
          Came to the current; they were clad all in armor,

{The coast-guard again.}

          In link-woven burnies. The land-warder noticed
          The return of the earlmen, as he erstwhile had seen them;
        5 Nowise with insult he greeted the strangers
          From the naze of the cliff, but rode on to meet them;
          Said the bright-armored visitors[1] vesselward traveled
[65]      Welcome to Weders. The wide-bosomed craft then
          Lay on the sand, laden with armor,
       10 With horses and jewels, the ring-stemmèd sailer:
          The mast uptowered o'er the treasure of Hrothgar.

{Beowulf gives the guard a handsome sword.}

          To the boat-ward a gold-bound brand he presented,
          That he was afterwards honored on the ale-bench more highly
          As the heirloom's owner. [2]Set he out on his vessel,
       15 To drive on the deep, Dane-country left he.
          Along by the mast then a sea-garment fluttered,
          A rope-fastened sail. The sea-boat resounded,
          The wind o'er the waters the wave-floater nowise
          Kept from its journey; the sea-goer traveled,
       20 The foamy-necked floated forth o'er the currents,
          The well-fashioned vessel o'er the ways of the ocean,

{The Geats see their own land again.}

          Till they came within sight of the cliffs of the Geatmen,
          The well-known headlands. The wave-goer hastened
          Driven by breezes, stood on the shore.

{The port-warden is anxiously looking for them.}

       25 Prompt at the ocean, the port-ward was ready,
          Who long in the past outlooked in the distance,[3]
          At water's-edge waiting well-lovèd heroes;
          He bound to the bank then the broad-bosomed vessel
          Fast in its fetters, lest the force of the waters
       30 Should be able to injure the ocean-wood winsome.
          Bade he up then take the treasure of princes,
          Plate-gold and fretwork; not far was it thence
          To go off in search of the giver of jewels:
[66]      Hrethel's son Higelac at home there remaineth,[4]
       35 Himself with his comrades close to the sea-coast.
          The building was splendid, the king heroic,
          Great in his hall, Hygd very young was,

{Hygd, the noble queen of Higelac, lavish of gifts.}

          Fine-mooded, clever, though few were the winters
          That the daughter of Hæreth had dwelt in the borough;
       40 But she nowise was cringing nor niggard of presents,
          Of ornaments rare, to the race of the Geatmen.

{Offa's consort, Thrytho, is contrasted with Hygd.}

          Thrytho nursed anger, excellent[5] folk-queen,
          Hot-burning hatred: no hero whatever
          'Mong household companions, her husband excepted

{She is a terror to all save her husband.}

       45 Dared to adventure to look at the woman
          With eyes in the daytime;[6] but he knew that death-chains
          Hand-wreathed were wrought him: early thereafter,
          When the hand-strife was over, edges were ready,
          That fierce-raging sword-point had to force a decision,
       50 Murder-bale show. Such no womanly custom
          For a lady to practise, though lovely her person,
          That a weaver-of-peace, on pretence of anger
          A belovèd liegeman of life should deprive.
          Soothly this hindered Heming's kinsman;
       55 Other ale-drinking earlmen asserted
          That fearful folk-sorrows fewer she wrought them,
          Treacherous doings, since first she was given
          Adorned with gold to the war-hero youthful,
          For her origin honored, when Offa's great palace
       60 O'er the fallow flood by her father's instructions
          She sought on her journey, where she afterwards fully,
          Famed for her virtue, her fate on the king's-seat
[67]      Enjoyed in her lifetime, love did she hold with
          The ruler of heroes, the best, it is told me,
       65 Of all of the earthmen that oceans encompass,
          Of earl-kindreds endless; hence Offa was famous
          Far and widely, by gifts and by battles,
          Spear-valiant hero; the home of his fathers
          He governed with wisdom, whence Eomær did issue
       70 For help unto heroes, Heming's kinsman,
          Grandson of Garmund, great in encounters.



          Then the brave one departed, his band along with him,

{Beowulf and his party seek Higelac.}

          Seeking the sea-shore, the sea-marches treading,
          The wide-stretching shores. The world-candle glimmered,
          The sun from the southward; they proceeded then onward,
        5 Early arriving where they heard that the troop-lord,
          Ongentheow's slayer, excellent, youthful
          Folk-prince and warrior was distributing jewels,
          Close in his castle. The coming of Beowulf
          Was announced in a message quickly to Higelac,
       10 That the folk-troop's defender forth to the palace
          The linden-companion alive was advancing,
          Secure from the combat courtward a-going.
          The building was early inward made ready
          For the foot-going guests as the good one had ordered.

{Beowulf sits by his liegelord.}

       15 He sat by the man then who had lived through the struggle,
          Kinsman by kinsman, when the king of the people
          Had in lordly language saluted the dear one,

{Queen Hygd receives the heroes.}

          In words that were formal. The daughter of Hæreth
          Coursed through the building, carrying mead-cups:[1]
[68]   20 She loved the retainers, tendered the beakers
          To the high-minded Geatmen. Higelac 'gan then

{Higelac is greatly interested in Beowulf's adventures.}

          Pleasantly plying his companion with questions
          In the high-towering palace. A curious interest
          Tormented his spirit, what meaning to see in
       25 The Sea-Geats' adventures: "Beowulf worthy,

{Give an account of thy adventures, Beowulf dear.}

          How throve your journeying, when thou thoughtest suddenly
          Far o'er the salt-streams to seek an encounter,
          A battle at Heorot? Hast bettered for Hrothgar,
          The famous folk-leader, his far-published sorrows
       30 Any at all? In agony-billows

{My suspense has been great.}

          I mused upon torture, distrusted the journey
          Of the belovèd liegeman; I long time did pray thee
          By no means to seek out the murderous spirit,
          To suffer the South-Danes themselves to decide on[2]
       35 Grappling with Grendel. To God I am thankful
          To be suffered to see thee safe from thy journey."

{Beowulf narrates his adventures.}

          Beowulf answered, bairn of old Ecgtheow:
          "'Tis hidden by no means, Higelac chieftain,
          From many of men, the meeting so famous,
       40 What mournful moments of me and of Grendel
          Were passed in the place where he pressing affliction
          On the Victory-Scyldings scathefully brought,
          Anguish forever; that all I avengèd,
          So that any under heaven of the kinsmen of Grendel

{Grendel's kindred have no cause to boast.}

       45 Needeth not boast of that cry-in-the-morning,
          Who longest liveth of the loth-going kindred,[3]
          Encompassed by moorland. I came in my journey
          To the royal ring-hall, Hrothgar to greet there:

{Hrothgar received me very cordially.}

          Soon did the famous scion of Healfdene,
       50 When he understood fully the spirit that led me,
          Assign me a seat with the son of his bosom.
[69]      The troop was in joyance; mead-glee greater
          'Neath arch of the ether not ever beheld I

{The queen also showed up no little honor.}

          'Mid hall-building holders. The highly-famed queen,
       55 Peace-tie of peoples, oft passed through the building,
          Cheered the young troopers; she oft tendered a hero
          A beautiful ring-band, ere she went to her sitting.

{Hrothgar's lovely daughter.}

          Oft the daughter of Hrothgar in view of the courtiers
          To the earls at the end the ale-vessel carried,
       60 Whom Freaware I heard then hall-sitters title,
          When nail-adorned jewels she gave to the heroes:

{She is betrothed to Ingeld, in order to unite the Danes and Heathobards.}

          Gold-bedecked, youthful, to the glad son of Froda
          Her faith has been plighted; the friend of the Scyldings,
          The guard of the kingdom, hath given his sanction,[4]
       65 And counts it a vantage, for a part of the quarrels,
          A portion of hatred, to pay with the woman.
          [5]Somewhere not rarely, when the ruler has fallen,
          The life-taking lance relaxeth its fury
          For a brief breathing-spell, though the bride be charming!



          "It well may discomfit the prince of the Heathobards
          And each of the thanemen of earls that attend him,
[70]      When he goes to the building escorting the woman,
          That a noble-born Daneman the knights should be feasting:
        5 There gleam on his person the leavings of elders
          Hard and ring-bright, Heathobards' treasure,
          While they wielded their arms, till they misled to the battle
          Their own dear lives and belovèd companions.
          He saith at the banquet who the collar beholdeth,
       10 An ancient ash-warrior who earlmen's destruction
          Clearly recalleth (cruel his spirit),
          Sadly beginneth sounding the youthful
          Thane-champion's spirit through the thoughts of his bosom,
          War-grief to waken, and this word-answer speaketh:

{Ingeld is stirred up to break the truce.}

       15 'Art thou able, my friend, to know when thou seest it
          The brand which thy father bare to the conflict
          In his latest adventure, 'neath visor of helmet,
          The dearly-loved iron, where Danemen did slay him,
          And brave-mooded Scyldings, on the fall of the heroes,
       20 (When vengeance was sleeping) the slaughter-place wielded?
          E'en now some man of the murderer's progeny
          Exulting in ornaments enters the building,
          Boasts of his blood-shedding, offbeareth the jewel
          Which thou shouldst wholly hold in possession!'
       25 So he urgeth and mindeth on every occasion
          With woe-bringing words, till waxeth the season
          When the woman's thane for the works of his father,
          The bill having bitten, blood-gory sleepeth,
          Fated to perish; the other one thenceward
       30 'Scapeth alive, the land knoweth thoroughly.[1]
          Then the oaths of the earlmen on each side are broken,
          When rancors unresting are raging in Ingeld
          And his wife-love waxeth less warm after sorrow.
          So the Heathobards' favor not faithful I reckon,
       35 Their part in the treaty not true to the Danemen,
          Their friendship not fast. I further shall tell thee

[71]

{Having made these preliminary statements, I will now tell thee of
Grendel, the monster.}

          More about Grendel, that thou fully mayst hear,
          Ornament-giver, what afterward came from
          The hand-rush of heroes. When heaven's bright jewel
       40 O'er earthfields had glided, the stranger came raging,
          The horrible night-fiend, us for to visit,
          Where wholly unharmed the hall we were guarding.

{Hondscio fell first}

          To Hondscio happened a hopeless contention,
          Death to the doomed one, dead he fell foremost,
       45 Girded war-champion; to him Grendel became then,
          To the vassal distinguished, a tooth-weaponed murderer,
          The well-beloved henchman's body all swallowed.
          Not the earlier off empty of hand did
          The bloody-toothed murderer, mindful of evils,
       50 Wish to escape from the gold-giver's palace,
          But sturdy of strength he strove to outdo me,
          Hand-ready grappled. A glove was suspended
          Spacious and wondrous, in art-fetters fastened,
          Which was fashioned entirely by touch of the craftman
       55 From the dragon's skin by the devil's devices:
          He down in its depths would do me unsadly
          One among many, deed-doer raging,
          Though sinless he saw me; not so could it happen
          When I in my anger upright did stand.
       60 'Tis too long to recount how requital I furnished
          For every evil to the earlmen's destroyer;

{I reflected honor upon my people.}

          'Twas there, my prince, that I proudly distinguished
          Thy land with my labors. He left and retreated,
          He lived his life a little while longer:
       65 Yet his right-hand guarded his footstep in Heorot,
          And sad-mooded thence to the sea-bottom fell he,
          Mournful in mind. For the might-rush of battle

{King Hrothgar lavished gifts upon me.}

          The friend of the Scyldings, with gold that was plated,
          With ornaments many, much requited me,
       70 When daylight had dawned, and down to the banquet
          We had sat us together. There was chanting and joyance:
          The age-stricken Scylding asked many questions
[72]      And of old-times related; oft light-ringing harp-strings,
          Joy-telling wood, were touched by the brave one;
       75 Now he uttered measures, mourning and truthful,
          Then the large-hearted land-king a legend of wonder
          Truthfully told us. Now troubled with years

{The old king is sad over the loss of his youthful vigor.}

          The age-hoary warrior afterward began to
          Mourn for the might that marked him in youth-days;
       80 His breast within boiled, when burdened with winters
          Much he remembered. From morning till night then
          We joyed us therein as etiquette suffered,
          Till the second night season came unto earth-folk.
          Then early thereafter, the mother of Grendel

{Grendel's mother.}

       85 Was ready for vengeance, wretched she journeyed;
          Her son had death ravished, the wrath of the Geatmen.
          The horrible woman avengèd her offspring,
          And with mighty mainstrength murdered a hero.

{Æschere falls a prey to her vengeance.}

          There the spirit of Æschere, agèd adviser,
       90 Was ready to vanish; nor when morn had lightened
          Were they anywise suffered to consume him with fire,
          Folk of the Danemen, the death-weakened hero,
          Nor the belovèd liegeman to lay on the pyre;

{She suffered not his body to be burned, but ate it.}

          She the corpse had offcarried in the clutch of the foeman[2]
       95 'Neath mountain-brook's flood. To Hrothgar 'twas saddest
          Of pains that ever had preyed on the chieftain;
          By the life of thee the land-prince then me[3]
          Besought very sadly, in sea-currents' eddies
          To display my prowess, to peril my safety,
      100 Might-deeds accomplish; much did he promise.

{I sought the creature in her den,}

          I found then the famous flood-current's cruel,
          Horrible depth-warder. A while unto us two
[73]      Hand was in common; the currents were seething
          With gore that was clotted, and Grendel's fierce mother's

{and hewed her head off.}

      105 Head I offhacked in the hall at the bottom
          With huge-reaching sword-edge, hardly I wrested
          My life from her clutches; not doomed was I then,

{Jewels were freely bestowed upon me.}

          But the warden of earlmen afterward gave me
          Jewels in quantity, kinsman of Healfdene.




          "So the belovèd land-prince lived in decorum;
          I had missed no rewards, no meeds of my prowess,
          But he gave me jewels, regarding my wishes,
          Healfdene his bairn; I'll bring them to thee, then,

{All my gifts I lay at thy feet.}

        5 Atheling of earlmen, offer them gladly.
          And still unto thee is all my affection:[1]
          But few of my folk-kin find I surviving
          But thee, dear Higelac!" Bade he in then to carry[2]
          The boar-image, banner, battle-high helmet,
       10 Iron-gray armor, the excellent weapon,

{This armor I have belonged of yore to Heregar.}

          In song-measures said: "This suit-for-the-battle
          Hrothgar presented me, bade me expressly,
          Wise-mooded atheling, thereafter to tell thee[3]
          The whole of its history, said King Heregar owned it,
       15 Dane-prince for long: yet he wished not to give then
[74]      The mail to his son, though dearly he loved him,
          Hereward the hardy. Hold all in joyance!"
          I heard that there followed hard on the jewels
          Two braces of stallions of striking resemblance,
       20 Dappled and yellow; he granted him usance
          Of horses and treasures. So a kinsman should bear him,
          No web of treachery weave for another,
          Nor by cunning craftiness cause the destruction

{Higelac loves his nephew Beowulf.}

          Of trusty companion. Most precious to Higelac,
       25 The bold one in battle, was the bairn of his sister,
          And each unto other mindful of favors.

{Beowulf gives Hygd the necklace that Wealhtheow had given him.}

          I am told that to Hygd he proffered the necklace,
          Wonder-gem rare that Wealhtheow gave him,
          The troop-leader's daughter, a trio of horses
       30 Slender and saddle-bright; soon did the jewel
          Embellish her bosom, when the beer-feast was over.
          So Ecgtheow's bairn brave did prove him,

{Beowulf is famous.}

          War-famous man, by deeds that were valiant,
          He lived in honor, belovèd companions
       35 Slew not carousing; his mood was not cruel,
          But by hand-strength hugest of heroes then living
          The brave one retained the bountiful gift that
          The Lord had allowed him. Long was he wretched,
          So that sons of the Geatmen accounted him worthless,
       40 And the lord of the liegemen loth was to do him
          Mickle of honor, when mead-cups were passing;
          They fully believed him idle and sluggish,

{He is requited for the slights suffered in earlier days.}

          An indolent atheling: to the honor-blest man there
          Came requital for the cuts he had suffered.
       45 The folk-troop's defender bade fetch to the building
          The heirloom of Hrethel, embellished with gold,

{Higelac overwhelms the conqueror with gifts.}

          So the brave one enjoined it; there was jewel no richer
          In the form of a weapon 'mong Geats of that era;
          In Beowulf's keeping he placed it and gave him
       50 Seven of thousands, manor and lordship.
          Common to both was land 'mong the people,
[75]      Estate and inherited rights and possessions,
          To the second one specially spacious dominions,
          To the one who was better. It afterward happened
       55 In days that followed, befell the battle-thanes,

{After Heardred's death, Beowulf becomes king.}

          After Higelac's death, and when Heardred was murdered
          With weapons of warfare 'neath well-covered targets,
          When valiant battlemen in victor-band sought him,
          War-Scylfing heroes harassed the nephew
       60 Of Hereric in battle. To Beowulf's keeping
          Turned there in time extensive dominions:

{He rules the Geats fifty years.}

          He fittingly ruled them a fifty of winters
          (He a man-ruler wise was, manor-ward old) till
          A certain one 'gan, on gloom-darkening nights, a

{The fire-drake.}

       65 Dragon, to govern, who guarded a treasure,
          A high-rising stone-cliff, on heath that was grayish:
          A path 'neath it lay, unknown unto mortals.
          Some one of earthmen entered the mountain,
          The heathenish hoard laid hold of with ardor;



          *       *       *       *       *       *       *
          He sought of himself who sorely did harm him,
          But, for need very pressing, the servant of one of
          The sons of the heroes hate-blows evaded,
        5 Seeking for shelter and the sin-driven warrior
          Took refuge within there. He early looked in it,
          *       *       *       *       *       *       *
          *       *       *       *       *       *       *
[76]      *  *  *  *  *  * when the onset surprised him,

{The hoard.}

       10 He a gem-vessel saw there: many of suchlike
          Ancient ornaments in the earth-cave were lying,
          As in days of yore some one of men of
          Illustrious lineage, as a legacy monstrous,
          There had secreted them, careful and thoughtful,
       15 Dear-valued jewels. Death had offsnatched them,
          In the days of the past, and the one man moreover
          Of the flower of the folk who fared there the longest,
          Was fain to defer it, friend-mourning warder,
          A little longer to be left in enjoyment
       20 Of long-lasting treasure.[1] A barrow all-ready
          Stood on the plain the stream-currents nigh to,
          New by the ness-edge, unnethe of approaching:
          The keeper of rings carried within a
          [2]Ponderous deal of the treasure of nobles,
       25 Of gold that was beaten, briefly he spake then:[3]

{The ring-giver bewails the loss of retainers.}

          "Hold thou, O Earth, now heroes no more may,
          The earnings of earlmen. Lo! erst in thy bosom
          Worthy men won them; war-death hath ravished,
          Perilous life-bale, all my warriors,
       30 Liegemen belovèd, who this life have forsaken,
          Who hall-pleasures saw. No sword-bearer have I,
          And no one to burnish the gold-plated vessel,
          The high-valued beaker: my heroes are vanished.
          The hardy helmet behung with gilding
       35 Shall be reaved of its riches: the ring-cleansers slumber
          Who were charged to have ready visors-for-battle,
          And the burnie that bided in battle-encounter
[77]      O'er breaking of war-shields the bite of the edges
          Moulds with the hero. The ring-twisted armor,
       40 Its lord being lifeless, no longer may journey
          Hanging by heroes; harp-joy is vanished,
          The rapture of glee-wood, no excellent falcon
          Swoops through the building, no swift-footed charger
          Grindeth the gravel. A grievous destruction
       45 No few of the world-folk widely hath scattered!"
          So, woful of spirit one after all
          Lamented mournfully, moaning in sadness
          By day and by night, till death with its billows

{The fire-dragon}

          Dashed on his spirit. Then the ancient dusk-scather
       50 Found the great treasure standing all open,
          He who flaming and fiery flies to the barrows,
          Naked war-dragon, nightly escapeth
          Encompassed with fire; men under heaven
          Widely beheld him. 'Tis said that he looks for[4]
       55 The hoard in the earth, where old he is guarding
          The heathenish treasure; he'll be nowise the better.

{The dragon meets his match.}

          So three-hundred winters the waster of peoples
          Held upon earth that excellent hoard-hall,
          Till the forementioned earlman angered him bitterly:
       60 The beat-plated beaker he bare to his chieftain
          And fullest remission for all his remissness
          Begged of his liegelord. Then the hoard[5] was discovered,
          The treasure was taken, his petition was granted

{The hero plunders the dragon's den}

          The lorn-mooded liegeman. His lord regarded
       65 The old-work of earth-folk--'twas the earliest occasion.
          When the dragon awoke, the strife was renewed there;
          He snuffed 'long the stone then, stout-hearted found he
[78]      The footprint of foeman; too far had he gone
          With cunning craftiness close to the head of
       70 The fire-spewing dragon. So undoomed he may 'scape from
          Anguish and exile with ease who possesseth
          The favor of Heaven. The hoard-warden eagerly
          Searched o'er the ground then, would meet with the person
          That caused him sorrow while in slumber reclining:
       75 Gleaming and wild he oft went round the cavern,
          All of it outward; not any of earthmen
          Was seen in that desert.[6] Yet he joyed in the battle,
          Rejoiced in the conflict: oft he turned to the barrow,
          Sought for the gem-cup;[7] this he soon perceived then

{The dragon perceives that some one has disturbed his treasure.}

       80 That some man or other had discovered the gold,
          The famous folk-treasure. Not fain did the hoard-ward
          Wait until evening; then the ward of the barrow
          Was angry in spirit, the loathèd one wished to
          Pay for the dear-valued drink-cup with fire.
       85 Then the day was done as the dragon would have it,
          He no longer would wait on the wall, but departed

{The dragon is infuriated.}

          Fire-impelled, flaming. Fearful the start was
          To earls in the land, as it early thereafter
          To their giver-of-gold was grievously ended.




{The dragon spits fire.}

          The stranger began then to vomit forth fire,
          To burn the great manor; the blaze then glimmered
          For anguish to earlmen, not anything living
[79]      Was the hateful air-goer willing to leave there.
        5 The war of the worm widely was noticed,
          The feud of the foeman afar and anear,
          How the enemy injured the earls of the Geatmen,
          Harried with hatred: back he hied to the treasure,
          To the well-hidden cavern ere the coming of daylight.
       10 He had circled with fire the folk of those regions,
          With brand and burning; in the barrow he trusted,
          In the wall and his war-might: the weening deceived him.

{Beowulf hears of the havoc wrought by the dragon.}

          Then straight was the horror to Beowulf published,
          Early forsooth, that his own native homestead,[1]
       15 The best of buildings, was burning and melting,
          Gift-seat of Geatmen. 'Twas a grief to the spirit
          Of the good-mooded hero, the greatest of sorrows:

{He fears that Heaven is punishing him for some crime.}

          The wise one weened then that wielding his kingdom
          'Gainst the ancient commandments, he had bitterly angered
       20 The Lord everlasting: with lorn meditations
          His bosom welled inward, as was nowise his custom.
          The fire-spewing dragon fully had wasted
          The fastness of warriors, the water-land outward,
          The manor with fire. The folk-ruling hero,
       25 Prince of the Weders, was planning to wreak him.
          The warmen's defender bade them to make him,
          Earlmen's atheling, an excellent war-shield

{He orders an iron shield to be made from him, wood is useless.}

          Wholly of iron: fully he knew then
          That wood from the forest was helpless to aid him,
       30 Shield against fire. The long-worthy ruler
          Must live the last of his limited earth-days,
          Of life in the world and the worm along with him,
          Though he long had been holding hoard-wealth in plenty.

{He determines to fight alone.}

          Then the ring-prince disdained to seek with a war-band,
       35 With army extensive, the air-going ranger;
          He felt no fear of the foeman's assaults and
          He counted for little the might of the dragon,
[80]      His power and prowess: for previously dared he

{Beowulf's early triumphs referred to}

          A heap of hostility, hazarded dangers,
       40 War-thane, when Hrothgar's palace he cleansèd,
          Conquering combatant, clutched in the battle
          The kinsmen of Grendel, of kindred detested.[2]

{Higelac's death recalled.}

          'Twas of hand-fights not least where Higelac was slaughtered,
          When the king of the Geatmen with clashings of battle,
       45 Friend-lord of folks in Frisian dominions,
          Offspring of Hrethrel perished through sword-drink,
          With battle-swords beaten; thence Beowulf came then
          On self-help relying, swam through the waters;
          He bare on his arm, lone-going, thirty
       50 Outfits of armor, when the ocean he mounted.
          The Hetwars by no means had need to be boastful
          Of their fighting afoot, who forward to meet him
          Carried their war-shields: not many returned from
          The brave-mooded battle-knight back to their homesteads.
       55 Ecgtheow's bairn o'er the bight-courses swam then,
          Lone-goer lorn to his land-folk returning,
          Where Hygd to him tendered treasure and kingdom,

{Heardred's lack of capacity to rule.}

          Rings and dominion: her son she not trusted,
          To be able to keep the kingdom devised him
       60 'Gainst alien races, on the death of King Higelac.

{Beowulf's tact and delicacy recalled.}

          Yet the sad ones succeeded not in persuading the atheling
          In any way ever, to act as a suzerain
          To Heardred, or promise to govern the kingdom;
          Yet with friendly counsel in the folk he sustained him,
       65 Gracious, with honor, till he grew to be older,

{Reference is here made to a visit which Beowulf receives from Eanmund and
Eadgils, why they come is not known.}

          Wielded the Weders. Wide-fleeing outlaws,
          Ohthere's sons, sought him o'er the waters:
          They had stirred a revolt 'gainst the helm of the Scylfings,
          The best of the sea-kings, who in Swedish dominions
       70 Distributed treasure, distinguished folk-leader.
[81]      'Twas the end of his earth-days; injury fatal[3]
          By swing of the sword he received as a greeting,
          Offspring of Higelac; Ongentheow's bairn
          Later departed to visit his homestead,
       75 When Heardred was dead; let Beowulf rule them,
          Govern the Geatmen: good was that folk-king.




          He planned requital for the folk-leader's ruin
          In days thereafter, to Eadgils the wretched
          Becoming an enemy. Ohthere's son then
          Went with a war-troop o'er the wide-stretching currents
        5 With warriors and weapons: with woe-journeys cold he
          After avenged him, the king's life he took.

{Beowulf has been preserved through many perils.}

          So he came off uninjured from all of his battles,
          Perilous fights, offspring of Ecgtheow,
          From his deeds of daring, till that day most momentous
       10 When he fate-driven fared to fight with the dragon.

{With eleven comrades, he seeks the dragon.}

          With eleven companions the prince of the Geatmen
          Went lowering with fury to look at the fire-drake:
          Inquiring he'd found how the feud had arisen,
          Hate to his heroes; the highly-famed gem-vessel
       15 Was brought to his keeping through the hand of th' informer.

{A guide leads the way, but}

          That in the throng was thirteenth of heroes,
          That caused the beginning of conflict so bitter,
          Captive and wretched, must sad-mooded thenceward

{very reluctantly.}

          Point out the place: he passed then unwillingly
       20 To the spot where he knew of the notable cavern,
          The cave under earth, not far from the ocean,
          The anger of eddies, which inward was full of
          Jewels and wires: a warden uncanny,
[82]      Warrior weaponed, wardered the treasure,
       25 Old under earth; no easy possession
          For any of earth-folk access to get to.
          Then the battle-brave atheling sat on the naze-edge,
          While the gold-friend of Geatmen gracious saluted
          His fireside-companions: woe was his spirit,
       30 Death-boding, wav'ring; Weird very near him,
          Who must seize the old hero, his soul-treasure look for,
          Dragging aloof his life from his body:
          Not flesh-hidden long was the folk-leader's spirit.
          Beowulf spake, Ecgtheow's son:

{Beowulf's retrospect.}

       35 "I survived in my youth-days many a conflict,
          Hours of onset: that all I remember.
          I was seven-winters old when the jewel-prince took me,
          High-lord of heroes, at the hands of my father,
          Hrethel the hero-king had me in keeping,

{Hrethel took me when I was seven.}

       40 Gave me treasure and feasting, our kinship remembered;
          Not ever was I _any_ less dear to him

{He treated me as a son.}

          Knight in the boroughs, than the bairns of his household,
          Herebald and Hæthcyn and Higelac mine.
          To the eldest unjustly by acts of a kinsman
       45 Was murder-bed strewn, since him Hæthcyn from horn-bow

{One of the brothers accidentally kills another.}

          His sheltering chieftain shot with an arrow,
          Erred in his aim and injured his kinsman,
          One brother the other, with blood-sprinkled spear:

{No fee could compound for such a calamity.}

          'Twas a feeless fight, finished in malice,
       50 Sad to his spirit; the folk-prince however
          Had to part from existence with vengeance untaken.

{[A parallel case is supposed.]}

          So to hoar-headed hero 'tis heavily crushing[1]
[83]      To live to see his son as he rideth
          Young on the gallows: then measures he chanteth,
       55 A song of sorrow, when his son is hanging
          For the raven's delight, and aged and hoary
          He is unable to offer any assistance.
          Every morning his offspring's departure
          Is constant recalled: he cares not to wait for
       60 The birth of an heir in his borough-enclosures,
          Since that one through death-pain the deeds hath experienced.
          He heart-grieved beholds in the house of his son the
          Wine-building wasted, the wind-lodging places
          Reaved of their roaring; the riders are sleeping,
       65 The knights in the grave; there's no sound of the harp-wood,
          Joy in the yards, as of yore were familiar.



          "He seeks then his chamber, singeth a woe-song
          One for the other; all too extensive
          Seemed homesteads and plains. So the helm of the Weders

{Hrethel grieves for Herebald.}

          Mindful of Herebald heart-sorrow carried,
        5 Stirred with emotion, nowise was able
          To wreak his ruin on the ruthless destroyer:
          He was unable to follow the warrior with hatred,
          With deeds that were direful, though dear he not held him.
[84]      Then pressed by the pang this pain occasioned him,
       10 He gave up glee, God-light elected;
          He left to his sons, as the man that is rich does,
          His land and fortress, when from life he departed.

{Strife between Swedes and Geats.}

          Then was crime and hostility 'twixt Swedes and Geatmen,
          O'er wide-stretching water warring was mutual,
       15 Burdensome hatred, when Hrethel had perished,
          And Ongentheow's offspring were active and valiant,
          Wished not to hold to peace oversea, but
          Round Hreosna-beorh often accomplished
          Cruelest massacre. This my kinsman avengèd,
       20 The feud and fury, as 'tis found on inquiry,
          Though one of them paid it with forfeit of life-joys,

{Hæthcyn's fall at Ravenswood.}

          With price that was hard: the struggle became then
          Fatal to Hæthcyn, lord of the Geatmen.
          Then I heard that at morning one brother the other
       25 With edges of irons egged on to murder,
          Where Ongentheow maketh onset on Eofor:
          The helmet crashed, the hoary-haired Scylfing
          Sword-smitten fell, his hand then remembered
          Feud-hate sufficient, refused not the death-blow.

{I requited him for the jewels he gave me.}

       30 The gems that he gave me, with jewel-bright sword I
          'Quited in contest, as occasion was offered:
          Land he allowed me, life-joy at homestead,
          Manor to live on. Little he needed
          From Gepids or Danes or in Sweden to look for
       35 Trooper less true, with treasure to buy him;
          'Mong foot-soldiers ever in front I would hie me,
          Alone in the vanguard, and evermore gladly
          Warfare shall wage, while this weapon endureth
          That late and early often did serve me

{Beowulf refers to his having slain Dæghrefn.}

       40 When I proved before heroes the slayer of Dæghrefn,
          Knight of the Hugmen: he by no means was suffered
          To the king of the Frisians to carry the jewels,
          The breast-decoration; but the banner-possessor
          Bowed in the battle, brave-mooded atheling.
[85]   45 No weapon was slayer, but war-grapple broke then
          The surge of his spirit, his body destroying.
          Now shall weapon's edge make war for the treasure,
          And hand and firm-sword." Beowulf spake then,
          Boast-words uttered--the latest occasion:

{He boasts of his youthful prowess, and declares himself still fearless.}

       50 "I braved in my youth-days battles unnumbered;
          Still am I willing the struggle to look for,
          Fame-deeds perform, folk-warden prudent,
          If the hateful despoiler forth from his cavern
          Seeketh me out!" Each of the heroes,
       55 Helm-bearers sturdy, he thereupon greeted

{His last salutations.}

          Belovèd co-liegemen--his last salutation:
          "No brand would I bear, no blade for the dragon,
          Wist I a way my word-boast to 'complish[1]
          Else with the monster, as with Grendel I did it;
       60 But fire in the battle hot I expect there,
          Furious flame-burning: so I fixed on my body
          Target and war-mail. The ward of the barrow[2]
          I'll not flee from a foot-length, the foeman uncanny.
          At the wall 'twill befall us as Fate decreeth,

{Let Fate decide between us.}

       65 Each one's Creator. I am eager in spirit,
          With the wingèd war-hero to away with all boasting.
          Bide on the barrow with burnies protected,

{Wait ye here till the battle is over.}

          Earls in armor, which of _us_ two may better
          Bear his disaster, when the battle is over.
       70 'Tis no matter of yours, and man cannot do it,
          But me and me only, to measure his strength with
          The monster of malice, might-deeds to 'complish.
          I with prowess shall gain the gold, or the battle,
[86]      Direful death-woe will drag off your ruler!"
       75 The mighty champion rose by his shield then,
          Brave under helmet, in battle-mail went he
          'Neath steep-rising stone-cliffs, the strength he relied on
          Of one man alone: no work for a coward.
          Then he saw by the wall who a great many battles
       80 Had lived through, most worthy, when foot-troops collided,

{The place of strife is described.}

          Stone-arches standing, stout-hearted champion,
          Saw a brook from the barrow bubbling out thenceward:
          The flood of the fountain was fuming with war-flame:
          Not nigh to the hoard, for season the briefest
       85 Could he brave, without burning, the abyss that was yawning,
          The drake was so fiery. The prince of the Weders
          Caused then that words came from his bosom,
          So fierce was his fury; the firm-hearted shouted:
          His battle-clear voice came in resounding
       90 'Neath the gray-colored stone. Stirred was his hatred,

{Beowulf calls out under the stone arches.}

          The hoard-ward distinguished the speech of a man;
          Time was no longer to look out for friendship.
          The breath of the monster issued forth first,
          Vapory war-sweat, out of the stone-cave:

{The terrible encounter.}

       95 The earth re-echoed. The earl 'neath the barrow
          Lifted his shield, lord of the Geatmen,
          Tow'rd the terrible stranger: the ring-twisted creature's
          Heart was then ready to seek for a struggle.

{Beowulf brandishes his sword,}

          The excellent battle-king first brandished his weapon,
      100 The ancient heirloom, of edges unblunted,[3]
          To the death-planners twain was terror from other.

{and stands against his shield.}

          The lord of the troopers intrepidly stood then
          'Gainst his high-rising shield, when the dragon coiled him

{The dragon coils himself.}

          Quickly together: in corslet he bided.
[87]  105 He went then in blazes, bended and striding,
          Hasting him forward. His life and body
          The targe well protected, for time-period shorter
          Than wish demanded for the well-renowned leader,
          Where he then for the first day was forced to be victor,
      110 Famous in battle, as Fate had not willed it.
          The lord of the Geatmen uplifted his hand then,
          Smiting the fire-drake with sword that was precious,
          That bright on the bone the blade-edge did weaken,
          Bit more feebly than his folk-leader needed,
      115 Burdened with bale-griefs. Then the barrow-protector,

{The dragon rages}

          When the sword-blow had fallen, was fierce in his spirit,
          Flinging his fires, flamings of battle
          Gleamed then afar: the gold-friend of Weders

{Beowulf's sword fails him.}

          Boasted no conquests, his battle-sword failed him
      120 Naked in conflict, as by no means it ought to,
          Long-trusty weapon. 'Twas no slight undertaking
          That Ecgtheow's famous offspring would leave
          The drake-cavern's bottom; he must live in some region
          Other than this, by the will of the dragon,
      125 As each one of earthmen existence must forfeit.
          'Twas early thereafter the excellent warriors

{The combat is renewed.}

          Met with each other. Anew and afresh
          The hoard-ward took heart (gasps heaved then his bosom):

{The great hero is reduced to extremities.}

          Sorrow he suffered encircled with fire
      130 Who the people erst governed. His companions by no means
          Were banded about him, bairns of the princes,

{His comrades flee!}

          With valorous spirit, but they sped to the forest,
          Seeking for safety. The soul-deeps of one were

{Blood is thicker than water.}

          Ruffled by care: kin-love can never
      135 Aught in him waver who well doth consider.

[88]




{Wiglaf remains true--the ideal Teutonic liegeman.}

          The son of Weohstan was Wiglaf entitled,
          Shield-warrior precious, prince of the Scylfings,
          Ælfhere's kinsman: he saw his dear liegelord
          Enduring the heat 'neath helmet and visor.
        5 Then he minded the holding that erst he had given him,

{Wiglaf recalls Beowulf's generosity.}

          The Wægmunding warriors' wealth-blessèd homestead,
          Each of the folk-rights his father had wielded;
          He was hot for the battle, his hand seized the target,
          The yellow-bark shield, he unsheathed his old weapon,
       10 Which was known among earthmen as the relic of Eanmund,
          Ohthere's offspring, whom, exiled and friendless,
          Weohstan did slay with sword-edge in battle,
          And carried his kinsman the clear-shining helmet,
          The ring-made burnie, the old giant-weapon
       15 That Onela gave him, his boon-fellow's armor,
          Ready war-trappings: he the feud did not mention,
          Though he'd fatally smitten the son of his brother.
          Many a half-year held he the treasures,
          The bill and the burnie, till his bairn became able,
       20 Like his father before him, fame-deeds to 'complish;
          Then he gave him 'mong Geatmen a goodly array of
          Weeds for his warfare; he went from life then
          Old on his journey. 'Twas the earliest time then

{This is Wiglaf's first battle as liegeman of Beowulf.}

          That the youthful champion might charge in the battle
       25 Aiding his liegelord; his spirit was dauntless.
          Nor did kinsman's bequest quail at the battle:
          This the dragon discovered on their coming together.
          Wiglaf uttered many a right-saying,
          Said to his fellows, sad was his spirit:

{Wiglaf appeals to the pride of the cowards.}

       30 "I remember the time when, tasting the mead-cup,
          We promised in the hall the lord of us all
[89]      Who gave us these ring-treasures, that this battle-equipment,
          Swords and helmets, we'd certainly quite him,
          Should need of such aid ever befall him:

{How we have forfeited our liegelord's confidence!}

       35 In the war-band he chose us for this journey spontaneously,
          Stirred us to glory and gave me these jewels,
          Since he held and esteemed us trust-worthy spearmen,
          Hardy helm-bearers, though this hero-achievement
          Our lord intended alone to accomplish,
       40 Ward of his people, for most of achievements,
          Doings audacious, he did among earth-folk.

{Our lord is in sore need of us.}

          The day is now come when the ruler of earthmen
          Needeth the vigor of valiant heroes:
          Let us wend us towards him, the war-prince to succor,
       45 While the heat yet rageth, horrible fire-fight.

{I would rather die than go home with out my suzerain.}

          God wot in me, 'tis mickle the liefer
          The blaze should embrace my body and eat it
          With my treasure-bestower. Meseemeth not proper
          To bear our battle-shields back to our country,
       50 'Less first we are able to fell and destroy the
          Long-hating foeman, to defend the life of

{Surely he does not deserve to die alone.}

          The prince of the Weders. Well do I know 'tisn't
          Earned by his exploits, he only of Geatmen
          Sorrow should suffer, sink in the battle:
       55 Brand and helmet to us both shall be common,
          [1]Shield-cover, burnie." Through the bale-smoke he stalked then,
          Went under helmet to the help of his chieftain,

{Wiglaf reminds Beowulf of his youthful boasts.}

          Briefly discoursing: "Beowulf dear,
          Perform thou all fully, as thou formerly saidst,
       60 In thy youthful years, that while yet thou livedst
[90]      Thou wouldst let thine honor not ever be lessened.
          Thy life thou shalt save, mighty in actions,
          Atheling undaunted, with all of thy vigor;

{The monster advances on them.}

          I'll give thee assistance." The dragon came raging,
       65 Wild-mooded stranger, when these words had been uttered
          ('Twas the second occasion), seeking his enemies,
          Men that were hated, with hot-gleaming fire-waves;
          With blaze-billows burned the board to its edges:
          The fight-armor failed then to furnish assistance
       70 To the youthful spear-hero: but the young-agèd stripling
          Quickly advanced 'neath his kinsman's war-target,
          Since his own had been ground in the grip of the fire.

{Beowulf strikes at the dragon.}

          Then the warrior-king was careful of glory,
          He soundly smote with sword-for-the-battle,
       75 That it stood in the head by hatred driven;
          Nægling was shivered, the old and iron-made

{His sword fails him.}

          Brand of Beowulf in battle deceived him.
          'Twas denied him that edges of irons were able
          To help in the battle; the hand was too mighty
       80 [2]Which every weapon, as I heard on inquiry,
          Outstruck in its stroke, when to struggle he carried
          The wonderful war-sword: it waxed him no better.

{The dragon advances on Beowulf again.}

          Then the people-despoiler--third of his onsets--
          Fierce-raging fire-drake, of feud-hate was mindful,
       85 Charged on the strong one, when chance was afforded,
          Heated and war-grim, seized on his neck
          With teeth that were bitter; he bloody did wax with
          Soul-gore seething; sword-blood in waves boiled.


{Wiglaf defends Beowulf.}

          Then I heard that at need of the king of the people
          The upstanding earlman exhibited prowess,
          Vigor and courage, as suited his nature;
          [1]He his head did not guard, but the high-minded liegeman's
        5 Hand was consumed, when he succored his kinsman,
          So he struck the strife-bringing strange-comer lower,
          Earl-thane in armor, that _in_ went the weapon
          Gleaming and plated, that 'gan then the fire[2]

{Beowulf draws his knife,}

          Later to lessen. The liegelord himself then
       10 Retained his consciousness, brandished his war-knife,
          Battle-sharp, bitter, that he bare on his armor:

{and cuts the dragon.}

          The Weder-lord cut the worm in the middle.
          They had felled the enemy (life drove out then[3]
          Puissant prowess), the pair had destroyed him,
       15 Land-chiefs related: so a liegeman should prove him,
          A thaneman when needed. To the prince 'twas the last of
          His era of conquest by his own great achievements,

[92]

{Beowulf's wound swells and burns.}

          The latest of world-deeds. The wound then began
          Which the earth-dwelling dragon erstwhile had wrought him
       20 To burn and to swell. He soon then discovered
          That bitterest bale-woe in his bosom was raging,
          Poison within. The atheling advanced then,

{He sits down exhausted.}

          That along by the wall, he prudent of spirit
          Might sit on a settle; he saw the giant-work,
       25 How arches of stone strengthened with pillars
          The earth-hall eternal inward supported.
          Then the long-worthy liegeman laved with his hand the

{Wiglaf bathes his lord's head.}

          Far-famous chieftain, gory from sword-edge,
          Refreshing the face of his friend-lord and ruler,
       30 Sated with battle, unbinding his helmet.
          Beowulf answered, of his injury spake he,
          His wound that was fatal (he was fully aware
          He had lived his allotted life-days enjoying
          The pleasures of earth; then past was entirely
       35 His measure of days, death very near):

{Beowulf regrets that he has no son.}

          "My son I would give now my battle-equipments,
          Had any of heirs been after me granted,
          Along of my body. This people I governed
          Fifty of winters: no king 'mong my neighbors
       40 Dared to encounter me with comrades-in-battle,
          Try me with terror. The time to me ordered
          I bided at home, mine own kept fitly,
          Sought me no snares, swore me not many

{I can rejoice in a well-spent life.}

          Oaths in injustice. Joy over all this
       45 I'm able to have, though ill with my death-wounds;
          Hence the Ruler of Earthmen need not charge me
          With the killing of kinsmen, when cometh my life out
          Forth from my body. Fare thou with haste now

{Bring me the hoard, Wiglaf, that my dying eyes may be refreshed by a
sight of it.}

          To behold the hoard 'neath the hoar-grayish stone,
       50 Well-lovèd Wiglaf, now the worm is a-lying,
          Sore-wounded sleepeth, disseized of his treasure.
          Go thou in haste that treasures of old I,
          Gold-wealth may gaze on, together see lying
[93]      The ether-bright jewels, be easier able,
       55 Having the heap of hoard-gems, to yield my
          Life and the land-folk whom long I have governed."



{Wiglaf fulfils his lord's behest.}

          Then heard I that Wihstan's son very quickly,
          These words being uttered, heeded his liegelord
          Wounded and war-sick, went in his armor,
          His well-woven ring-mail, 'neath the roof of the barrow.
        5 Then the trusty retainer treasure-gems many

{The dragon's den.}

          Victorious saw, when the seat he came near to,
          Gold-treasure sparkling spread on the bottom,
          Wonder on the wall, and the worm-creature's cavern,
          The ancient dawn-flier's, vessels a-standing,
       10 Cups of the ancients of cleansers bereavèd,
          Robbed of their ornaments: there were helmets in numbers,
          Old and rust-eaten, arm-bracelets many,
          Artfully woven. Wealth can easily,
          Gold on the sea-bottom, turn into vanity[1]
       15 Each one of earthmen, arm him who pleaseth!
          And he saw there lying an all-golden banner
          High o'er the hoard, of hand-wonders greatest,
          Linkèd with lacets: a light from it sparkled,
          That the floor of the cavern he was able to look on,

{The dragon is not there.}

       20 To examine the jewels. Sight of the dragon
[94]      Not any was offered, but edge offcarried him.

{Wiglaf bears the hoard away.}

          Then I heard that the hero the hoard-treasure plundered,
          The giant-work ancient reaved in the cavern,
          Bare on his bosom the beakers and platters,
       25 As himself would fain have it, and took off the standard,
          The brightest of beacons;[2] the bill had erst injured
          (Its edge was of iron), the old-ruler's weapon,
          Him who long had watched as ward of the jewels,
          Who fire-terror carried hot for the treasure,
       30 Rolling in battle, in middlemost darkness,
          Till murdered he perished. The messenger hastened,
          Not loth to return, hurried by jewels:
          Curiosity urged him if, excellent-mooded,
          Alive he should find the lord of the Weders
       35 Mortally wounded, at the place where he left him.
          'Mid the jewels he found then the famous old chieftain,
          His liegelord belovèd, at his life's-end gory:
          He thereupon 'gan to lave him with water,
          Till the point of his word piercèd his breast-hoard.
       40 Beowulf spake (the gold-gems he noticed),

{Beowulf is rejoiced to see the jewels.}

          The old one in sorrow: "For the jewels I look on
          Thanks do I utter for all to the Ruler,
          Wielder of Worship, with words of devotion,
          The Lord everlasting, that He let me such treasures
       45 Gain for my people ere death overtook me.
          Since I've bartered the agèd life to me granted
          For treasure of jewels, attend ye henceforward

{He desires to be held in memory by his people.}

          The wants of the war-thanes; I can wait here no longer.
          The battle-famed bid ye to build them a grave-hill,
       50 Bright when I'm burned, at the brim-current's limit;
          As a memory-mark to the men I have governed,
[95]      Aloft it shall tower on Whale's-Ness uprising,
          That earls of the ocean hereafter may call it
          Beowulf's barrow, those who barks ever-dashing
       55 From a distance shall drive o'er the darkness of waters."

{The hero's last gift}

          The bold-mooded troop-lord took from his neck then
          The ring that was golden, gave to his liegeman,
          The youthful war-hero, his gold-flashing helmet,
          His collar and war-mail, bade him well to enjoy them:

{and last words.}

       60 "Thou art latest left of the line of our kindred,
          Of Wægmunding people: Weird hath offcarried
          All of my kinsmen to the Creator's glory,
          Earls in their vigor: I shall after them fare."
          'Twas the aged liegelord's last-spoken word in
       65 His musings of spirit, ere he mounted the fire,
          The battle-waves burning: from his bosom departed
          His soul to seek the sainted ones' glory.



{Wiglaf is sorely grieved to see his lord look so un-warlike.}

          It had wofully chanced then the youthful retainer
          To behold on earth the most ardent-belovèd
          At his life-days' limit, lying there helpless.
          The slayer too lay there, of life all bereavèd,
        5 Horrible earth-drake, harassed with sorrow:

{The dragon has plundered his last hoard.}

          The round-twisted monster was permitted no longer
          To govern the ring-hoards, but edges of war-swords
          Mightily seized him, battle-sharp, sturdy
          Leavings of hammers, that still from his wounds
       10 The flier-from-farland fell to the earth
          Hard by his hoard-house, hopped he at midnight
          Not e'er through the air, nor exulting in jewels
          Suffered them to see him: but he sank then to earthward
          Through the hero-chief's handwork. I heard sure it throve then

[96]

{Few warriors dared to face the monster.}

       15 But few in the land of liegemen of valor,
          Though of every achievement bold he had proved him,
          To run 'gainst the breath of the venomous scather,
          Or the hall of the treasure to trouble with hand-blows,
          If he watching had found the ward of the hoard-hall
       20 On the barrow abiding. Beowulf's part of
          The treasure of jewels was paid for with death;
          Each of the twain had attained to the end of
          Life so unlasting. Not long was the time till

{The cowardly thanes come out of the thicket.}

          The tardy-at-battle returned from the thicket,
       25 The timid truce-breakers ten all together,
          Who durst not before play with the lances
          In the prince of the people's pressing emergency;

{They are ashamed of their desertion.}

          But blushing with shame, with shields they betook them,
          With arms and armor where the old one was lying:
       30 They gazed upon Wiglaf. He was sitting exhausted,
          Foot-going fighter, not far from the shoulders
          Of the lord of the people, would rouse him with water;
          No whit did it help him; though he hoped for it keenly,
          He was able on earth not at all in the leader
       35 Life to retain, and nowise to alter
          The will of the Wielder; the World-Ruler's power[1]
          Would govern the actions of each one of heroes,

{Wiglaf is ready to excoriate them.}

          As yet He is doing. From the young one forthwith then
          Could grim-worded greeting be got for him quickly
       40 Whose courage had failed him. Wiglaf discoursed then,
          Weohstan his son, sad-mooded hero,

{He begins to taunt them.}

          Looked on the hated: "He who soothness will utter
          Can say that the liegelord who gave you the jewels,
          The ornament-armor wherein ye are standing,
       45 When on ale-bench often he offered to hall-men
          Helmet and burnie, the prince to his liegemen,
          As best upon earth he was able to find him,--

[97]

{Surely our lord wasted his armor on poltroons.}

          That he wildly wasted his war-gear undoubtedly
          When battle o'ertook him.[2] The troop-king no need had
       50 To glory in comrades; yet God permitted him,

{He, however, got along without you}

          Victory-Wielder, with weapon unaided
          Himself to avenge, when vigor was needed.
          I life-protection but little was able
          To give him in battle, and I 'gan, notwithstanding,

{With some aid, I could have saved our liegelord}

       55 Helping my kinsman (my strength overtaxing):
          He waxed the weaker when with weapon I smote on
          My mortal opponent, the fire less strongly
          Flamed from his bosom. Too few of protectors
          Came round the king at the critical moment.

{Gift-giving is over with your people: the ring-lord is dead.}

       60 Now must ornament-taking and weapon-bestowing,
          Home-joyance all, cease for your kindred,
          Food for the people; each of your warriors
          Must needs be bereavèd of rights that he holdeth
          In landed possessions, when faraway nobles
       65 Shall learn of your leaving your lord so basely,

{What is life without honor?}

          The dastardly deed. Death is more pleasant
          To every earlman than infamous life is!"



{Wiglaf sends the news of Beowulf's death to liegemen near by.}

          Then he charged that the battle be announced at the hedge
          Up o'er the cliff-edge, where the earl-troopers bided
          The whole of the morning, mood-wretched sat them,
          Bearers of battle-shields, both things expecting,
        5 The end of his lifetime and the coming again of
          The liegelord belovèd. Little reserved he
          Of news that was known, who the ness-cliff did travel,
          But he truly discoursed to all that could hear him:

[98]

{The messenger speaks.}

          "Now the free-giving friend-lord of the folk of the Weders,
       10 The folk-prince of Geatmen, is fast in his death-bed,
          By the deeds of the dragon in death-bed abideth;
          Along with him lieth his life-taking foeman
          Slain with knife-wounds: he was wholly unable
          To injure at all the ill-planning monster

{Wiglaf sits by our dead lord.}

       15 With bite of his sword-edge. Wiglaf is sitting,
          Offspring of Wihstan, up over Beowulf,
          Earl o'er another whose end-day hath reached him,
          Head-watch holdeth o'er heroes unliving,[1]

{Our lord's death will lead to attacks from our old foes.}

          For friend and for foeman. The folk now expecteth
       20 A season of strife when the death of the folk-king
          To Frankmen and Frisians in far-lands is published.
          The war-hatred waxed warm 'gainst the Hugmen,

{Higelac's death recalled.}

          When Higelac came with an army of vessels
          Faring to Friesland, where the Frankmen in battle
       25 Humbled him and bravely with overmight 'complished
          That the mail-clad warrior must sink in the battle,
          Fell 'mid his folk-troop: no fret-gems presented
          The atheling to earlmen; aye was denied us
          Merewing's mercy. The men of the Swedelands
       30 For truce or for truth trust I but little;
          But widely 'twas known that near Ravenswood Ongentheow

{Hæthcyn's fall referred to.}

          Sundered Hæthcyn the Hrethling from life-joys,
          When for pride overweening the War-Scylfings first did
          Seek the Geatmen with savage intentions.
       35 Early did Ohthere's age-laden father,
          Old and terrible, give blow in requital,
          Killing the sea-king, the queen-mother rescued,
          The old one his consort deprived of her gold,
          Onela's mother and Ohthere's also,
[99]   40 And then followed the feud-nursing foemen till hardly,
          Reaved of their ruler, they Ravenswood entered.
          Then with vast-numbered forces he assaulted the remnant,
          Weary with wounds, woe often promised
          The livelong night to the sad-hearted war-troop:
       45 Said he at morning would kill them with edges of weapons,
          Some on the gallows for glee to the fowls.
          Aid came after to the anxious-in-spirit
          At dawn of the day, after Higelac's bugle
          And trumpet-sound heard they, when the good one proceeded
       50 And faring followed the flower of the troopers.

  


{The messenger continues, and refers to the feuds of Swedes and Geats.}

          "The blood-stainèd trace of Swedes and Geatmen,
          The death-rush of warmen, widely was noticed,
          How the folks with each other feud did awaken.
          The worthy one went then[1] with well-beloved comrades,
        5 Old and dejected to go to the fastness,
          Ongentheo earl upward then turned him;
          Of Higelac's battle he'd heard on inquiry,
          The exultant one's prowess, despaired of resistance,
          With earls of the ocean to be able to struggle,
       10 'Gainst sea-going sailors to save the hoard-treasure,
          His wife and his children; he fled after thenceward
          Old 'neath the earth-wall. Then was offered pursuance
          To the braves of the Swedemen, the banner[2] to Higelac.
[100]     They fared then forth o'er the field-of-protection,
       15 When the Hrethling heroes hedgeward had thronged them.
          Then with edges of irons was Ongentheow driven,
          The gray-haired to tarry, that the troop-ruler had to
          Suffer the power solely of Eofor:

{Wulf wounds Ongentheow.}

          Wulf then wildly with weapon assaulted him,
       20 Wonred his son, that for swinge of the edges
          The blood from his body burst out in currents,
          Forth 'neath his hair. He feared not however,
          Gray-headed Scylfing, but speedily quited

{Ongentheow gives a stout blow in return.}

          The wasting wound-stroke with worse exchange,
       25 When the king of the thane-troop thither did turn him:
          The wise-mooded son of Wonred was powerless
          To give a return-blow to the age-hoary man,
          But his head-shielding helmet first hewed he to pieces,
          That flecked with gore perforce he did totter,
       30 Fell to the earth; not fey was he yet then,
          But up did he spring though an edge-wound had reached him.

{Eofor smites Ongentheow fiercely.}

          Then Higelac's vassal, valiant and dauntless,
          When his brother lay dead, made his broad-bladed weapon,
          Giant-sword ancient, defence of the giants,
       35 Bound o'er the shield-wall; the folk-prince succumbed then,

{Ongentheow is slain.}

          Shepherd of people, was pierced to the vitals.
          There were many attendants who bound up his kinsman,
          Carried him quickly when occasion was granted
          That the place of the slain they were suffered to manage.
       40 This pending, one hero plundered the other,
          His armor of iron from Ongentheow ravished,
          His hard-sword hilted and helmet together;

{Eofor takes the old king's war-gear to Higelac.}

          The old one's equipments he carried to Higelac.
          He the jewels received, and rewards 'mid the troopers
       45 Graciously promised, and so did accomplish:
          The king of the Weders requited the war-rush,
          Hrethel's descendant, when home he repaired him,

{Higelac rewards the brothers.}

          To Eofor and Wulf with wide-lavished treasures,
          To each of them granted a hundred of thousands
[101]  50 In land and rings wrought out of wire:

{His gifts were beyond cavil.}

          None upon mid-earth needed to twit him[3]
          With the gifts he gave them, when glory they conquered;

{To Eofor he also gives his only daughter in marriage.}

          And to Eofor then gave he his one only daughter,
          The honor of home, as an earnest of favor.
       55 That's the feud and hatred--as ween I 'twill happen--
          The anger of earthmen, that earls of the Swedemen
          Will visit on us, when they hear that our leader
          Lifeless is lying, he who longtime protected
          His hoard and kingdom 'gainst hating assailers,
       60 Who on the fall of the heroes defended of yore
          The deed-mighty Scyldings,[4] did for the troopers
          What best did avail them, and further moreover

{It is time for us to pay the last marks of respect to our lord.}

          Hero-deeds 'complished. Now is haste most fitting,
          That the lord of liegemen we look upon yonder,
       65 And _that_ one carry on journey to death-pyre
          Who ring-presents gave us. Not aught of it all
          Shall melt with the brave one--there's a mass of bright jewels,
          Gold beyond measure, grewsomely purchased
          And ending it all ornament-rings too
       70 Bought with his life; these fire shall devour,
          Flame shall cover, no earlman shall wear
          A jewel-memento, nor beautiful virgin
          Have on her neck rings to adorn her,
          But wretched in spirit bereavèd of gold-gems
       75 She shall oft with others be exiled and banished,
          Since the leader of liegemen hath laughter forsaken,
[102]     Mirth and merriment. Hence many a war-spear
          Cold from the morning shall be clutched in the fingers,
          Heaved in the hand, no harp-music's sound shall
       80 Waken the warriors, but the wan-coated raven
          Fain over fey ones freely shall gabble,
          Shall say to the eagle how he sped in the eating,
          When, the wolf his companion, he plundered the slain."
          So the high-minded hero was rehearsing these stories
       85 Loathsome to hear; he lied as to few of

{The warriors go sadly to look at Beowulf's lifeless body.}

          Weirds and of words. All the war-troop arose then,
          'Neath the Eagle's Cape sadly betook them,
          Weeping and woful, the wonder to look at.
          They saw on the sand then soulless a-lying,
       90 His slaughter-bed holding, him who rings had given them
          In days that were done; then the death-bringing moment
          Was come to the good one, that the king very warlike,
          Wielder of Weders, with wonder-death perished.
          First they beheld there a creature more wondrous,

{They also see the dragon.}

       95 The worm on the field, in front of them lying,
          The foeman before them: the fire-spewing dragon,
          Ghostly and grisly guest in his terrors,
          Was scorched in the fire; as he lay there he measured
          Fifty of feet; came forth in the night-time[5]
      100 To rejoice in the air, thereafter departing
          To visit his den; he in death was then fastened,
          He would joy in no other earth-hollowed caverns.
          There stood round about him beakers and vessels,
          Dishes were lying and dear-valued weapons,
      105 With iron-rust eaten, as in earth's mighty bosom
          A thousand of winters there they had rested:

{The hoard was under a magic spell.}

          That mighty bequest then with magic was guarded,
          Gold of the ancients, that earlman not any
          The ring-hall could touch, save Ruling-God only,
[103] 110 Sooth-king of Vict'ries gave whom He wished to

{God alone could give access to it.}

          [6](He is earth-folk's protector) to open the treasure,
          E'en to such among mortals as seemed to Him proper.




          Then 'twas seen that the journey prospered him little
          Who wrongly within had the ornaments hidden[1]
          Down 'neath the wall. The warden erst slaughtered
          Some few of the folk-troop: the feud then thereafter
        5 Was hotly avengèd. 'Tis a wonder where,[2]
          When the strength-famous trooper has attained to the end of
          Life-days allotted, then no longer the man may
          Remain with his kinsmen where mead-cups are flowing.
          So to Beowulf happened when the ward of the barrow,
       10 Assaults, he sought for: himself had no knowledge
          How his leaving this life was likely to happen.
          So to doomsday, famous folk-leaders down did
          Call it with curses--who 'complished it there--
[104]     That that man should be ever of ill-deeds convicted,
       15 Confined in foul-places, fastened in hell-bonds,
          Punished with plagues, who this place should e'er ravage.[3]
          He cared not for gold: rather the Wielder's
          Favor preferred he first to get sight of.[4]

{Wiglaf addresses his comrades.}

          Wiglaf discoursed then, Wihstan his son:
       20 "Oft many an earlman on one man's account must
          Sorrow endure, as to us it hath happened.
          The liegelord belovèd we could little prevail on,
          Kingdom's keeper, counsel to follow,
          Not to go to the guardian of the gold-hoard, but let him
       25 Lie where he long was, live in his dwelling
          Till the end of the world. Met we a destiny
          Hard to endure: the hoard has been looked at,
          Been gained very grimly; too grievous the fate that[5]
          The prince of the people pricked to come thither.
       30 _I_ was therein and all of it looked at,
          The building's equipments, since access was given me,
          Not kindly at all entrance permitted

{He tells them of Beowulf's last moments.}

          Within under earth-wall. Hastily seized I
          And held in my hands a huge-weighing burden
       35 Of hoard-treasures costly, hither out bare them
          To my liegelord belovèd: life was yet in him,
          And consciousness also; the old one discoursed then
          Much and mournfully, commanded to greet you,

{Beowulf's dying request.}

          Bade that remembering the deeds of your friend-lord
       40 Ye build on the fire-hill of corpses a lofty
          Burial-barrow, broad and far-famous,
          As 'mid world-dwelling warriors he was widely most honored
          While he reveled in riches. Let us rouse us and hasten
[105]     Again to see and seek for the treasure,
       45 The wonder 'neath wall. The way I will show you,
          That close ye may look at ring-gems sufficient
          And gold in abundance. Let the bier with promptness
          Fully be fashioned, when forth we shall come,
          And lift we our lord, then, where long he shall tarry,
       50 Well-beloved warrior, 'neath the Wielder's protection."

{Wiglaf charges them to build a funeral-pyre.}

          Then the son of Wihstan bade orders be given,
          Mood-valiant man, to many of heroes,
          Holders of homesteads, that they hither from far,
          [6]Leaders of liegemen, should look for the good one
       55 With wood for his pyre: "The flame shall now swallow
          (The wan fire shall wax[7]) the warriors' leader
          Who the rain of the iron often abided,
          When, sturdily hurled, the storm of the arrows
          Leapt o'er linden-wall, the lance rendered service,
       60 Furnished with feathers followed the arrow."
          Now the wise-mooded son of Wihstan did summon
          The best of the braves from the band of the ruler

{He takes seven thanes, and enters the den.}

          Seven together; 'neath the enemy's roof he
          Went with the seven; one of the heroes
       65 Who fared at the front, a fire-blazing torch-light
          Bare in his hand. No lot then decided
          Who that hoard should havoc, when hero-earls saw it
          Lying in the cavern uncared-for entirely,
          Rusting to ruin: they rued then but little
       70 That they hastily hence hauled out the treasure,

{They push the dragon over the wall.}

          The dear-valued jewels; the dragon eke pushed they,
          The worm o'er the wall, let the wave-currents take him,
[106]     The waters enwind the ward of the treasures.

{The hoard is laid on a wain.}

          There wounden gold on a wain was uploaded,
       75 A mass unmeasured, the men-leader off then,
          The hero hoary, to Whale's-Ness was carried.



{Beowulf's pyre.}

          The folk of the Geatmen got him then ready
          A pile on the earth strong for the burning,
          Behung with helmets, hero-knights' targets,
          And bright-shining burnies, as he begged they should have them;
        5 Then wailing war-heroes their world-famous chieftain,
          Their liegelord beloved, laid in the middle.

{The funeral-flame.}

          Soldiers began then to make on the barrow
          The largest of dead-fires: dark o'er the vapor
          The smoke-cloud ascended, the sad-roaring fire,
       10 Mingled with weeping (the wind-roar subsided)
          Till the building of bone it had broken to pieces,
          Hot in the heart. Heavy in spirit
          They mood-sad lamented the men-leader's ruin;
          And mournful measures the much-grieving widow
       15 *       *       *       *       *       *       *
          *       *       *       *       *       *       *
          *       *       *       *       *       *       *
          *       *       *       *       *       *       *
          *       *       *       *       *       *       *
       20 *       *       *       *       *       *       *

{The Weders carry out their lord's last request.}

          The men of the Weders made accordingly
          A hill on the height, high and extensive,
          Of sea-going sailors to be seen from a distance,
          And the brave one's beacon built where the fire was,
       25 In ten-days' space, with a wall surrounded it,
          As wisest of world-folk could most worthily plan it.
          They placed in the barrow rings and jewels,

[107]

{Rings and gems are laid in the barrow.}

          All such ornaments as erst in the treasure
          War-mooded men had won in possession:
       30 The earnings of earlmen to earth they entrusted,
          The gold to the dust, where yet it remaineth
          As useless to mortals as in foregoing eras.
          'Round the dead-mound rode then the doughty-in-battle,
          Bairns of all twelve of the chiefs of the people,

{They mourn for their lord, and sing his praises.}

       35 More would they mourn, lament for their ruler,
          Speak in measure, mention him with pleasure,
          Weighed his worth, and his warlike achievements
          Mightily commended, as 'tis meet one praise his
          Liegelord in words and love him in spirit,
       40 When forth from his body he fares to destruction.
          So lamented mourning the men of the Geats,
          Fond-loving vassals, the fall of their lord,

{An ideal king.}

          Said he was kindest of kings under heaven,
          Gentlest of men, most winning of manner,
       45 Friendliest to folk-troops and fondest of honor.

[109]


Of Man’s first disobedience, and the fruit
Of that forbidden tree whose mortal taste
Brought death into the World, and all our woe,
With loss of Eden, till one greater Man
Restore us, and regain the blissful seat,
Sing, Heavenly Muse, that, on the secret top
Of Oreb, or of Sinai, didst inspire
That shepherd who first taught the chosen seed
In the beginning how the heavens and earth
Rose out of Chaos: or, if Sion hill
Delight thee more, and Siloa’s brook that flowed
Fast by the oracle of God, I thence
Invoke thy aid to my adventurous song,
That with no middle flight intends to soar
Above th’ Aonian mount, while it pursues
Things unattempted yet in prose or rhyme.
And chiefly thou, O Spirit, that dost prefer
Before all temples th’ upright heart and pure,
Instruct me, for thou know’st; thou from the first
Wast present, and, with mighty wings outspread,
Dove-like sat’st brooding on the vast Abyss,
And mad’st it pregnant: what in me is dark
Illumine, what is low raise and support;
That, to the height of this great argument,
I may assert Eternal Providence,
And justify the ways of God to men.
    Say first—for Heaven hides nothing from thy view,
Nor the deep tract of Hell—say first what cause
Moved our grand parents, in that happy state,
Favoured of Heaven so highly, to fall off
From their Creator, and transgress his will
For one restraint, lords of the World besides.
Who first seduced them to that foul revolt?
    Th’ infernal Serpent; he it was whose guile,
Stirred up with envy and revenge, deceived
The mother of mankind, what time his pride
Had cast him out from Heaven, with all his host
Of rebel Angels, by whose aid, aspiring
To set himself in glory above his peers,
He trusted to have equalled the Most High,
If he opposed, and with ambitious aim
Against the throne and monarchy of God,
Raised impious war in Heaven and battle proud,
With vain attempt. Him the Almighty Power
Hurled headlong flaming from th’ ethereal sky,
With hideous ruin and combustion, down
To bottomless perdition, there to dwell
In adamantine chains and penal fire,
Who durst defy th’ Omnipotent to arms.
    Nine times the space that measures day and night
To mortal men, he, with his horrid crew,
Lay vanquished, rolling in the fiery gulf,
Confounded, though immortal. But his doom
Reserved him to more wrath; for now the thought
Both of lost happiness and lasting pain
Torments him: round he throws his baleful eyes,
That witnessed huge affliction and dismay,
Mixed with obdurate pride and steadfast hate.
At once, as far as Angels ken, he views
The dismal situation waste and wild.
A dungeon horrible, on all sides round,
As one great furnace flamed; yet from those flames
No light; but rather darkness visible
Served only to discover sights of woe,
Regions of sorrow, doleful shades, where peace
And rest can never dwell, hope never comes
That comes to all, but torture without end
Still urges, and a fiery deluge, fed
With ever-burning sulphur unconsumed.
Such place Eternal Justice has prepared
For those rebellious; here their prison ordained
In utter darkness, and their portion set,
As far removed from God and light of Heaven
As from the centre thrice to th’ utmost pole.
Oh how unlike the place from whence they fell!
There the companions of his fall, o’erwhelmed
With floods and whirlwinds of tempestuous fire,
He soon discerns; and, weltering by his side,
One next himself in power, and next in crime,
Long after known in Palestine, and named
Beelzebub. To whom th’ Arch-Enemy,
And thence in Heaven called Satan, with bold words
Breaking the horrid silence, thus began:—
    “If thou beest he—but O how fallen! how changed
From him who, in the happy realms of light
Clothed with transcendent brightness, didst outshine
Myriads, though bright!—if he whom mutual league,
United thoughts and counsels, equal hope
And hazard in the glorious enterprise
Joined with me once, now misery hath joined
In equal ruin; into what pit thou seest
From what height fallen: so much the stronger proved
He with his thunder; and till then who knew
The force of those dire arms? Yet not for those,
Nor what the potent Victor in his rage
Can else inflict, do I repent, or change,
Though changed in outward lustre, that fixed mind,
And high disdain from sense of injured merit,
That with the Mightiest raised me to contend,
And to the fierce contentions brought along
Innumerable force of Spirits armed,
That durst dislike his reign, and, me preferring,
His utmost power with adverse power opposed
In dubious battle on the plains of Heaven,
And shook his throne. What though the field be lost?
All is not lost—the unconquerable will,
And study of revenge, immortal hate,
And courage never to submit or yield:
And what is else not to be overcome?
That glory never shall his wrath or might
Extort from me. To bow and sue for grace
With suppliant knee, and deify his power
Who, from the terror of this arm, so late
Doubted his empire—that were low indeed;
That were an ignominy and shame beneath
This downfall; since, by fate, the strength of Gods,
And this empyreal substance, cannot fail;
Since, through experience of this great event,
In arms not worse, in foresight much advanced,
We may with more successful hope resolve
To wage by force or guile eternal war,
Irreconcilable to our grand Foe,
Who now triumphs, and in th’ excess of joy
Sole reigning holds the tyranny of Heaven.”
    So spake th’ apostate Angel, though in pain,
Vaunting aloud, but racked with deep despair;
And him thus answered soon his bold compeer:—
    “O Prince, O Chief of many throned Powers
That led th’ embattled Seraphim to war
Under thy conduct, and, in dreadful deeds
Fearless, endangered Heaven’s perpetual King,
And put to proof his high supremacy,
Whether upheld by strength, or chance, or fate,
Too well I see and rue the dire event
That, with sad overthrow and foul defeat,
Hath lost us Heaven, and all this mighty host
In horrible destruction laid thus low,
As far as Gods and heavenly Essences
Can perish: for the mind and spirit remains
Invincible, and vigour soon returns,
Though all our glory extinct, and happy state
Here swallowed up in endless misery.
But what if he our Conqueror (whom I now
Of force believe almighty, since no less
Than such could have o’erpowered such force as ours)
Have left us this our spirit and strength entire,
Strongly to suffer and support our pains,
That we may so suffice his vengeful ire,
Or do him mightier service as his thralls
By right of war, whate’er his business be,
Here in the heart of Hell to work in fire,
Or do his errands in the gloomy Deep?
What can it the avail though yet we feel
Strength undiminished, or eternal being
To undergo eternal punishment?”
    Whereto with speedy words th’ Arch-Fiend replied:—
“Fallen Cherub, to be weak is miserable,
Doing or suffering: but of this be sure—
To do aught good never will be our task,
But ever to do ill our sole delight,
As being the contrary to his high will
Whom we resist. If then his providence
Out of our evil seek to bring forth good,
Our labour must be to pervert that end,
And out of good still to find means of evil;
Which ofttimes may succeed so as perhaps
Shall grieve him, if I fail not, and disturb
His inmost counsels from their destined aim.
But see! the angry Victor hath recalled
His ministers of vengeance and pursuit
Back to the gates of Heaven: the sulphurous hail,
Shot after us in storm, o’erblown hath laid
The fiery surge that from the precipice
Of Heaven received us falling; and the thunder,
Winged with red lightning and impetuous rage,
Perhaps hath spent his shafts, and ceases now
To bellow through the vast and boundless Deep.
Let us not slip th’ occasion, whether scorn
Or satiate fury yield it from our Foe.
Seest thou yon dreary plain, forlorn and wild,
The seat of desolation, void of light,
Save what the glimmering of these livid flames
Casts pale and dreadful? Thither let us tend
From off the tossing of these fiery waves;
There rest, if any rest can harbour there;
And, re-assembling our afflicted powers,
Consult how we may henceforth most offend
Our enemy, our own loss how repair,
How overcome this dire calamity,
What reinforcement we may gain from hope,
If not, what resolution from despair.”
    Thus Satan, talking to his nearest mate,
With head uplift above the wave, and eyes
That sparkling blazed; his other parts besides
Prone on the flood, extended long and large,
Lay floating many a rood, in bulk as huge
As whom the fables name of monstrous size,
Titanian or Earth-born, that warred on Jove,
Briareos or Typhon, whom the den
By ancient Tarsus held, or that sea-beast
Leviathan, which God of all his works
Created hugest that swim th’ ocean-stream.
Him, haply slumbering on the Norway foam,
The pilot of some small night-foundered skiff,
Deeming some island, oft, as seamen tell,
With fixed anchor in his scaly rind,
Moors by his side under the lee, while night
Invests the sea, and wished morn delays.
So stretched out huge in length the Arch-fiend lay,
Chained on the burning lake; nor ever thence
Had risen, or heaved his head, but that the will
And high permission of all-ruling Heaven
Left him at large to his own dark designs,
That with reiterated crimes he might
Heap on himself damnation, while he sought
Evil to others, and enraged might see
How all his malice served but to bring forth
Infinite goodness, grace, and mercy, shewn
On Man by him seduced, but on himself
Treble confusion, wrath, and vengeance poured.
    Forthwith upright he rears from off the pool
His mighty stature; on each hand the flames
Driven backward slope their pointing spires, and rolled
In billows, leave i’ th’ midst a horrid vale.
Then with expanded wings he steers his flight
Aloft, incumbent on the dusky air,
That felt unusual weight; till on dry land
He lights—if it were land that ever burned
With solid, as the lake with liquid fire,
And such appeared in hue as when the force
Of subterranean wind transports a hill
Torn from Pelorus, or the shattered side
Of thundering Etna, whose combustible
And fuelled entrails, thence conceiving fire,
Sublimed with mineral fury, aid the winds,
And leave a singed bottom all involved
With stench and smoke. Such resting found the sole
Of unblest feet. Him followed his next mate;
Both glorying to have scaped the Stygian flood
As gods, and by their own recovered strength,
Not by the sufferance of supernal Power.
    “Is this the region, this the soil, the clime,”
Said then the lost Archangel, “this the seat
That we must change for Heaven?—this mournful gloom
For that celestial light? Be it so, since he
Who now is sovereign can dispose and bid
What shall be right: farthest from him is best
Whom reason hath equalled, force hath made supreme
Above his equals. Farewell, happy fields,
Where joy for ever dwells! Hail, horrors! hail,
Infernal world! and thou, profoundest Hell,
Receive thy new possessor—one who brings
A mind not to be changed by place or time.
The mind is its own place, and in itself
Can make a Heaven of Hell, a Hell of Heaven.
What matter where, if I be still the same,
And what I should be, all but less than he
Whom thunder hath made greater? Here at least
We shall be free; th’ Almighty hath not built
Here for his envy, will not drive us hence:
Here we may reign secure; and, in my choice,
To reign is worth ambition, though in Hell:
Better to reign in Hell than serve in Heaven.
But wherefore let we then our faithful friends,
Th’ associates and co-partners of our loss,
Lie thus astonished on th’ oblivious pool,
And call them not to share with us their part
In this unhappy mansion, or once more
With rallied arms to try what may be yet
Regained in Heaven, or what more lost in Hell?”
    So Satan spake; and him Beelzebub
Thus answered:—“Leader of those armies bright
Which, but th’ Omnipotent, none could have foiled!
If once they hear that voice, their liveliest pledge
Of hope in fears and dangers—heard so oft
In worst extremes, and on the perilous edge
Of battle, when it raged, in all assaults
Their surest signal—they will soon resume
New courage and revive, though now they lie
Grovelling and prostrate on yon lake of fire,
As we erewhile, astounded and amazed;
No wonder, fallen such a pernicious height!”
    He scarce had ceased when the superior Fiend
Was moving toward the shore; his ponderous shield,
Ethereal temper, massy, large, and round,
Behind him cast. The broad circumference
Hung on his shoulders like the moon, whose orb
Through optic glass the Tuscan artist views
At evening, from the top of Fesole,
Or in Valdarno, to descry new lands,
Rivers, or mountains, in her spotty globe.
His spear—to equal which the tallest pine
Hewn on Norwegian hills, to be the mast
Of some great ammiral, were but a wand—
He walked with, to support uneasy steps
Over the burning marl, not like those steps
On Heaven’s azure; and the torrid clime
Smote on him sore besides, vaulted with fire.
Nathless he so endured, till on the beach
Of that inflamed sea he stood, and called
His legions—Angel Forms, who lay entranced
Thick as autumnal leaves that strow the brooks
In Vallombrosa, where th’ Etrurian shades
High over-arched embower; or scattered sedge
Afloat, when with fierce winds Orion armed
Hath vexed the Red-Sea coast, whose waves o’erthrew
Busiris and his Memphian chivalry,
While with perfidious hatred they pursued
The sojourners of Goshen, who beheld
From the safe shore their floating carcases
And broken chariot-wheels. So thick bestrown,
Abject and lost, lay these, covering the flood,
Under amazement of their hideous change.
He called so loud that all the hollow deep
Of Hell resounded:—“Princes, Potentates,
Warriors, the Flower of Heaven—once yours; now lost,
If such astonishment as this can seize
Eternal Spirits! Or have ye chosen this place
After the toil of battle to repose
Your wearied virtue, for the ease you find
To slumber here, as in the vales of Heaven?
Or in this abject posture have ye sworn
To adore the Conqueror, who now beholds
Cherub and Seraph rolling in the flood
With scattered arms and ensigns, till anon
His swift pursuers from Heaven-gates discern
Th’ advantage, and, descending, tread us down
Thus drooping, or with linked thunderbolts
Transfix us to the bottom of this gulf?
Awake, arise, or be for ever fallen!”
    They heard, and were abashed, and up they sprung
Upon the wing, as when men wont to watch
On duty, sleeping found by whom they dread,
Rouse and bestir themselves ere well awake.
Nor did they not perceive the evil plight
In which they were, or the fierce pains not feel;
Yet to their General’s voice they soon obeyed
Innumerable. As when the potent rod
Of Amram’s son, in Egypt’s evil day,
Waved round the coast, up-called a pitchy cloud
Of locusts, warping on the eastern wind,
That o’er the realm of impious Pharaoh hung
Like Night, and darkened all the land of Nile;
So numberless were those bad Angels seen
Hovering on wing under the cope of Hell,
’Twixt upper, nether, and surrounding fires;
Till, as a signal given, th’ uplifted spear
Of their great Sultan waving to direct
Their course, in even balance down they light
On the firm brimstone, and fill all the plain:
A multitude like which the populous North
Poured never from her frozen loins to pass
Rhene or the Danaw, when her barbarous sons
Came like a deluge on the South, and spread
Beneath Gibraltar to the Libyan sands.
Forthwith, form every squadron and each band,
The heads and leaders thither haste where stood
Their great Commander—godlike Shapes, and Forms
Excelling human; princely Dignities;
And Powers that erst in Heaven sat on thrones,
Though on their names in Heavenly records now
Be no memorial, blotted out and rased
By their rebellion from the Books of Life.
Nor had they yet among the sons of Eve
Got them new names, till, wandering o’er the earth,
Through God’s high sufferance for the trial of man,
By falsities and lies the greatest part
Of mankind they corrupted to forsake
God their Creator, and th’ invisible
Glory of him that made them to transform
Oft to the image of a brute, adorned
With gay religions full of pomp and gold,
And devils to adore for deities:
Then were they known to men by various names,
And various idols through the heathen world.
    Say, Muse, their names then known, who first, who last,
Roused from the slumber on that fiery couch,
At their great Emperorr’s call, as next in worth
Came singly where he stood on the bare strand,
While the promiscuous crowd stood yet aloof?
    The chief were those who, from the pit of Hell
Roaming to seek their prey on Earth, durst fix
Their seats, long after, next the seat of God,
Their altars by his altar, gods adored
Among the nations round, and durst abide
Jehovah thundering out of Sion, throned
Between the Cherubim; yea, often placed
Within his sanctuary itself their shrines,
Abominations; and with cursed things
His holy rites and solemn feasts profaned,
And with their darkness durst affront his light.
First, Moloch, horrid king, besmeared with blood
Of human sacrifice, and parents’ tears;
Though, for the noise of drums and timbrels loud,
Their children’s cries unheard that passed through fire
To his grim idol. Him the Ammonite
Worshiped in Rabba and her watery plain,
In Argob and in Basan, to the stream
Of utmost Arnon. Nor content with such
Audacious neighbourhood, the wisest heart
Of Solomon he led by fraud to build
His temple right against the temple of God
On that opprobrious hill, and made his grove
The pleasant valley of Hinnom, Tophet thence
And black Gehenna called, the type of Hell.
Next Chemos, th’ obscene dread of Moab’s sons,
From Aroar to Nebo and the wild
Of southmost Abarim; in Hesebon
And Horonaim, Seon’s real, beyond
The flowery dale of Sibma clad with vines,
And Eleale to th’ Asphaltic Pool:
Peor his other name, when he enticed
Israel in Sittim, on their march from Nile,
To do him wanton rites, which cost them woe.
Yet thence his lustful orgies he enlarged
Even to that hill of scandal, by the grove
Of Moloch homicide, lust hard by hate,
Till good Josiah drove them thence to Hell.
With these came they who, from the bordering flood
Of old Euphrates to the brook that parts
Egypt from Syrian ground, had general names
Of Baalim and Ashtaroth—those male,
These feminine. For Spirits, when they please,
Can either sex assume, or both; so soft
And uncompounded is their essence pure,
Not tried or manacled with joint or limb,
Nor founded on the brittle strength of bones,
Like cumbrous flesh; but, in what shape they choose,
Dilated or condensed, bright or obscure,
Can execute their airy purposes,
And works of love or enmity fulfil.
For those the race of Israel oft forsook
Their Living Strength, and unfrequented left
His righteous altar, bowing lowly down
To bestial gods; for which their heads as low
Bowed down in battle, sunk before the spear
Of despicable foes. With these in troop
Came Astoreth, whom the Phoenicians called
Astarte, queen of heaven, with crescent horns;
To whose bright image nightly by the moon
Sidonian virgins paid their vows and songs;
In Sion also not unsung, where stood
Her temple on th’ offensive mountain, built
By that uxorious king whose heart, though large,
Beguiled by fair idolatresses, fell
To idols foul. Thammuz came next behind,
Whose annual wound in Lebanon allured
The Syrian damsels to lament his fate
In amorous ditties all a summer’s day,
While smooth Adonis from his native rock
Ran purple to the sea, supposed with blood
Of Thammuz yearly wounded: the love-tale
Infected Sion’s daughters with like heat,
Whose wanton passions in the sacred porch
Ezekiel saw, when, by the vision led,
His eye surveyed the dark idolatries
Of alienated Judah. Next came one
Who mourned in earnest, when the captive ark
Maimed his brute image, head and hands lopt off,
In his own temple, on the grunsel-edge,
Where he fell flat and shamed his worshippers:
Dagon his name, sea-monster, upward man
And downward fish; yet had his temple high
Reared in Azotus, dreaded through the coast
Of Palestine, in Gath and Ascalon,
And Accaron and Gaza’s frontier bounds.
Him followed Rimmon, whose delightful seat
Was fair Damascus, on the fertile banks
Of Abbana and Pharphar, lucid streams.
He also against the house of God was bold:
A leper once he lost, and gained a king—
Ahaz, his sottish conqueror, whom he drew
God’s altar to disparage and displace
For one of Syrian mode, whereon to burn
His odious offerings, and adore the gods
Whom he had vanquished. After these appeared
A crew who, under names of old renown—
Osiris, Isis, Orus, and their train—
With monstrous shapes and sorceries abused
Fanatic Egypt and her priests to seek
Their wandering gods disguised in brutish forms
Rather than human. Nor did Israel scape
Th’ infection, when their borrowed gold composed
The calf in Oreb; and the rebel king
Doubled that sin in Bethel and in Dan,
Likening his Maker to the grazed ox—
Jehovah, who, in one night, when he passed
From Egypt marching, equalled with one stroke
Both her first-born and all her bleating gods.
Belial came last; than whom a Spirit more lewd
Fell not from Heaven, or more gross to love
Vice for itself. To him no temple stood
Or altar smoked; yet who more oft than he
In temples and at altars, when the priest
Turns atheist, as did Eli’s sons, who filled
With lust and violence the house of God?
In courts and palaces he also reigns,
And in luxurious cities, where the noise
Of riot ascends above their loftiest towers,
And injury and outrage; and, when night
Darkens the streets, then wander forth the sons
Of Belial, flown with insolence and wine.
Witness the streets of Sodom, and that night
In Gibeah, when the hospitable door
Exposed a matron, to avoid worse rape.
    These were the prime in order and in might:
The rest were long to tell; though far renowned
Th’ Ionian gods—of Javan’s issue held
Gods, yet confessed later than Heaven and Earth,
Their boasted parents;—Titan, Heaven’s first-born,
With his enormous brood, and birthright seized
By younger Saturn: he from mightier Jove,
His own and Rhea’s son, like measure found;
So Jove usurping reigned. These, first in Crete
And Ida known, thence on the snowy top
Of cold Olympus ruled the middle air,
Their highest heaven; or on the Delphian cliff,
Or in Dodona, and through all the bounds
Of Doric land; or who with Saturn old
Fled over Adria to th’ Hesperian fields,
And o’er the Celtic roamed the utmost Isles.
    All these and more came flocking; but with looks
Downcast and damp; yet such wherein appeared
Obscure some glimpse of joy to have found their Chief
Not in despair, to have found themselves not lost
In loss itself; which on his countenance cast
Like doubtful hue. But he, his wonted pride
Soon recollecting, with high words, that bore
Semblance of worth, not substance, gently raised
Their fainting courage, and dispelled their fears.
Then straight commands that, at the warlike sound
Of trumpets loud and clarions, be upreared
His mighty standard. That proud honour claimed
Azazel as his right, a Cherub tall:
Who forthwith from the glittering staff unfurled
Th’ imperial ensign; which, full high advanced,
Shone like a meteor streaming to the wind,
With gems and golden lustre rich emblazed,
Seraphic arms and trophies; all the while
Sonorous metal blowing martial sounds:
At which the universal host up-sent
A shout that tore Hell’s concave, and beyond
Frighted the reign of Chaos and old Night.
All in a moment through the gloom were seen
Ten thousand banners rise into the air,
With orient colours waving: with them rose
A forest huge of spears; and thronging helms
Appeared, and serried shields in thick array
Of depth immeasurable. Anon they move
In perfect phalanx to the Dorian mood
Of flutes and soft recorders—such as raised
To height of noblest temper heroes old
Arming to battle, and instead of rage
Deliberate valour breathed, firm, and unmoved
With dread of death to flight or foul retreat;
Nor wanting power to mitigate and swage
With solemn touches troubled thoughts, and chase
Anguish and doubt and fear and sorrow and pain
From mortal or immortal minds. Thus they,
Breathing united force with fixed thought,
Moved on in silence to soft pipes that charmed
Their painful steps o’er the burnt soil. And now
Advanced in view they stand—a horrid front
Of dreadful length and dazzling arms, in guise
Of warriors old, with ordered spear and shield,
Awaiting what command their mighty Chief
Had to impose. He through the armed files
Darts his experienced eye, and soon traverse
The whole battalion views—their order due,
Their visages and stature as of gods;
Their number last he sums. And now his heart
Distends with pride, and, hardening in his strength,
Glories: for never, since created Man,
Met such embodied force as, named with these,
Could merit more than that small infantry
Warred on by cranes—though all the giant brood
Of Phlegra with th’ heroic race were joined
That fought at Thebes and Ilium, on each side
Mixed with auxiliar gods; and what resounds
In fable or romance of Uther’s son,
Begirt with British and Armoric knights;
And all who since, baptized or infidel,
Jousted in Aspramont, or Montalban,
Damasco, or Marocco, or Trebisond,
Or whom Biserta sent from Afric shore
When Charlemain with all his peerage fell
By Fontarabbia. Thus far these beyond
Compare of mortal prowess, yet observed
Their dread Commander. He, above the rest
In shape and gesture proudly eminent,
Stood like a tower. His form had yet not lost
All her original brightness, nor appeared
Less than Archangel ruined, and th’ excess
Of glory obscured: as when the sun new-risen
Looks through the horizontal misty air
Shorn of his beams, or, from behind the moon,
In dim eclipse, disastrous twilight sheds
On half the nations, and with fear of change
Perplexes monarchs. Darkened so, yet shone
Above them all th’ Archangel: but his face
Deep scars of thunder had intrenched, and care
Sat on his faded cheek, but under brows
Of dauntless courage, and considerate pride
Waiting revenge. Cruel his eye, but cast
Signs of remorse and passion, to behold
The fellows of his crime, the followers rather
(Far other once beheld in bliss), condemned
For ever now to have their lot in pain—
Millions of Spirits for his fault amerced
Of Heaven, and from eternal splendours flung
For his revolt—yet faithful how they stood,
Their glory withered; as, when heaven’s fire
Hath scathed the forest oaks or mountain pines,
With singed top their stately growth, though bare,
Stands on the blasted heath. He now prepared
To speak; whereat their doubled ranks they bend
From wing to wing, and half enclose him round
With all his peers: attention held them mute.
Thrice he assayed, and thrice, in spite of scorn,
Tears, such as Angels weep, burst forth: at last
Words interwove with sighs found out their way:—
    “O myriads of immortal Spirits! O Powers
Matchless, but with th’ Almighty!—and that strife
Was not inglorious, though th’ event was dire,
As this place testifies, and this dire change,
Hateful to utter. But what power of mind,
Forseeing or presaging, from the depth
Of knowledge past or present, could have feared
How such united force of gods, how such
As stood like these, could ever know repulse?
For who can yet believe, though after loss,
That all these puissant legions, whose exile
Hath emptied Heaven, shall fail to re-ascend,
Self-raised, and repossess their native seat?
For me, be witness all the host of Heaven,
If counsels different, or danger shunned
By me, have lost our hopes. But he who reigns
Monarch in Heaven till then as one secure
Sat on his throne, upheld by old repute,
Consent or custom, and his regal state
Put forth at full, but still his strength concealed—
Which tempted our attempt, and wrought our fall.
Henceforth his might we know, and know our own,
So as not either to provoke, or dread
New war provoked: our better part remains
To work in close design, by fraud or guile,
What force effected not; that he no less
At length from us may find, who overcomes
By force hath overcome but half his foe.
Space may produce new Worlds; whereof so rife
There went a fame in Heaven that he ere long
Intended to create, and therein plant
A generation whom his choice regard
Should favour equal to the Sons of Heaven.
Thither, if but to pry, shall be perhaps
Our first eruption—thither, or elsewhere;
For this infernal pit shall never hold
Celestial Spirits in bondage, nor th’ Abyss
Long under darkness cover. But these thoughts
Full counsel must mature. Peace is despaired;
For who can think submission? War, then, war
Open or understood, must be resolved.”
    He spake; and, to confirm his words, outflew
Millions of flaming swords, drawn from the thighs
Of mighty Cherubim; the sudden blaze
Far round illumined Hell. Highly they raged
Against the Highest, and fierce with grasped arms
Clashed on their sounding shields the din of war,
Hurling defiance toward the vault of Heaven.
    There stood a hill not far, whose grisly top
Belched fire and rolling smoke; the rest entire
Shone with a glossy scurf—undoubted sign
That in his womb was hid metallic ore,
The work of sulphur. Thither, winged with speed,
A numerous brigade hastened: as when bands
Of pioneers, with spade and pickaxe armed,
Forerun the royal camp, to trench a field,
Or cast a rampart. Mammon led them on—
Mammon, the least erected Spirit that fell
From Heaven; for even in Heaven his looks and thoughts
Were always downward bent, admiring more
The riches of heaven’s pavement, trodden gold,
Than aught divine or holy else enjoyed
In vision beatific. By him first
Men also, and by his suggestion taught,
Ransacked the centre, and with impious hands
Rifled the bowels of their mother Earth
For treasures better hid. Soon had his crew
Opened into the hill a spacious wound,
And digged out ribs of gold. Let none admire
That riches grow in Hell; that soil may best
Deserve the precious bane. And here let those
Who boast in mortal things, and wondering tell
Of Babel, and the works of Memphian kings,
Learn how their greatest monuments of fame
And strength, and art, are easily outdone
By Spirits reprobate, and in an hour
What in an age they, with incessant toil
And hands innumerable, scarce perform.
Nigh on the plain, in many cells prepared,
That underneath had veins of liquid fire
Sluiced from the lake, a second multitude
With wondrous art founded the massy ore,
Severing each kind, and scummed the bullion-dross.
A third as soon had formed within the ground
A various mould, and from the boiling cells
By strange conveyance filled each hollow nook;
As in an organ, from one blast of wind,
To many a row of pipes the sound-board breathes.
Anon out of the earth a fabric huge
Rose like an exhalation, with the sound
Of dulcet symphonies and voices sweet—
Built like a temple, where pilasters round
Were set, and Doric pillars overlaid
With golden architrave; nor did there want
Cornice or frieze, with bossy sculptures graven;
The roof was fretted gold. Not Babylon
Nor great Alcairo such magnificence
Equalled in all their glories, to enshrine
Belus or Serapis their gods, or seat
Their kings, when Egypt with Assyria strove
In wealth and luxury. Th’ ascending pile
Stood fixed her stately height, and straight the doors,
Opening their brazen folds, discover, wide
Within, her ample spaces o’er the smooth
And level pavement: from the arched roof,
Pendent by subtle magic, many a row
Of starry lamps and blazing cressets, fed
With naptha and asphaltus, yielded light
As from a sky. The hasty multitude
Admiring entered; and the work some praise,
And some the architect. His hand was known
In Heaven by many a towered structure high,
Where sceptred Angels held their residence,
And sat as Princes, whom the supreme King
Exalted to such power, and gave to rule,
Each in his Hierarchy, the Orders bright.
Nor was his name unheard or unadored
In ancient Greece; and in Ausonian land
Men called him Mulciber; and how he fell
From Heaven they fabled, thrown by angry Jove
Sheer o’er the crystal battlements: from morn
To noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve,
A summer’s day, and with the setting sun
Dropt from the zenith, like a falling star,
On Lemnos, th’ Aegaean isle. Thus they relate,
Erring; for he with this rebellious rout
Fell long before; nor aught availed him now
To have built in Heaven high towers; nor did he scape
By all his engines, but was headlong sent,
With his industrious crew, to build in Hell.
    Meanwhile the winged Heralds, by command
Of sovereign power, with awful ceremony
And trumpet’s sound, throughout the host proclaim
A solemn council forthwith to be held
At Pandemonium, the high capital
Of Satan and his peers. Their summons called
From every band and squared regiment
By place or choice the worthiest: they anon
With hundreds and with thousands trooping came
Attended. All access was thronged; the gates
And porches wide, but chief the spacious hall
(Though like a covered field, where champions bold
Wont ride in armed, and at the Soldan’s chair
Defied the best of Paynim chivalry
To mortal combat, or career with lance),
Thick swarmed, both on the ground and in the air,
Brushed with the hiss of rustling wings. As bees
In spring-time, when the Sun with Taurus rides.
Pour forth their populous youth about the hive
In clusters; they among fresh dews and flowers
Fly to and fro, or on the smoothed plank,
The suburb of their straw-built citadel,
New rubbed with balm, expatiate, and confer
Their state-affairs: so thick the airy crowd
Swarmed and were straitened; till, the signal given,
Behold a wonder! They but now who seemed
In bigness to surpass Earth’s giant sons,
Now less than smallest dwarfs, in narrow room
Throng numberless—like that pygmean race
Beyond the Indian mount; or faery elves,
Whose midnight revels, by a forest-side
Or fountain, some belated peasant sees,
Or dreams he sees, while overhead the Moon
Sits arbitress, and nearer to the Earth
Wheels her pale course: they, on their mirth and dance
Intent, with jocund music charm his ear;
At once with joy and fear his heart rebounds.
Thus incorporeal Spirits to smallest forms
Reduced their shapes immense, and were at large,
Though without number still, amidst the hall
Of that infernal court. But far within,
And in their own dimensions like themselves,
The great Seraphic Lords and Cherubim
In close recess and secret conclave sat,
A thousand demi-gods on golden seats,
Frequent and full. After short silence then,
And summons read, the great consult began.





High on a throne of royal state, which far
Outshone the wealth of Ormus and of Ind,
Or where the gorgeous East with richest hand
Showers on her kings barbaric pearl and gold,
Satan exalted sat, by merit raised
To that bad eminence; and, from despair
Thus high uplifted beyond hope, aspires
Beyond thus high, insatiate to pursue
Vain war with Heaven; and, by success untaught,
His proud imaginations thus displayed:—
    “Powers and Dominions, Deities of Heaven!—
For, since no deep within her gulf can hold
Immortal vigour, though oppressed and fallen,
I give not Heaven for lost: from this descent
Celestial Virtues rising will appear
More glorious and more dread than from no fall,
And trust themselves to fear no second fate!—
Me though just right, and the fixed laws of Heaven,
Did first create your leader—next, free choice
With what besides in council or in fight
Hath been achieved of merit—yet this loss,
Thus far at least recovered, hath much more
Established in a safe, unenvied throne,
Yielded with full consent. The happier state
In Heaven, which follows dignity, might draw
Envy from each inferior; but who here
Will envy whom the highest place exposes
Foremost to stand against the Thunderer’s aim
Your bulwark, and condemns to greatest share
Of endless pain? Where there is, then, no good
For which to strive, no strife can grow up there
From faction: for none sure will claim in Hell
Precedence; none whose portion is so small
Of present pain that with ambitious mind
Will covet more! With this advantage, then,
To union, and firm faith, and firm accord,
More than can be in Heaven, we now return
To claim our just inheritance of old,
Surer to prosper than prosperity
Could have assured us; and by what best way,
Whether of open war or covert guile,
We now debate. Who can advise may speak.”
    He ceased; and next him Moloch, sceptred king,
Stood up—the strongest and the fiercest Spirit
That fought in Heaven, now fiercer by despair.
His trust was with th’ Eternal to be deemed
Equal in strength, and rather than be less
Cared not to be at all; with that care lost
Went all his fear: of God, or Hell, or worse,
He recked not, and these words thereafter spake:—
    “My sentence is for open war. Of wiles,
More unexpert, I boast not: them let those
Contrive who need, or when they need; not now.
For, while they sit contriving, shall the rest—
Millions that stand in arms, and longing wait
The signal to ascend—sit lingering here,
Heaven’s fugitives, and for their dwelling-place
Accept this dark opprobrious den of shame,
The prison of his tyranny who reigns
By our delay? No! let us rather choose,
Armed with Hell-flames and fury, all at once
O’er Heaven’s high towers to force resistless way,
Turning our tortures into horrid arms
Against the Torturer; when, to meet the noise
Of his almighty engine, he shall hear
Infernal thunder, and, for lightning, see
Black fire and horror shot with equal rage
Among his Angels, and his throne itself
Mixed with Tartarean sulphur and strange fire,
His own invented torments. But perhaps
The way seems difficult, and steep to scale
With upright wing against a higher foe!
Let such bethink them, if the sleepy drench
Of that forgetful lake benumb not still,
That in our proper motion we ascend
Up to our native seat; descent and fall
To us is adverse. Who but felt of late,
When the fierce foe hung on our broken rear
Insulting, and pursued us through the Deep,
With what compulsion and laborious flight
We sunk thus low? Th’ ascent is easy, then;
Th’ event is feared! Should we again provoke
Our stronger, some worse way his wrath may find
To our destruction, if there be in Hell
Fear to be worse destroyed! What can be worse
Than to dwell here, driven out from bliss, condemned
In this abhorred deep to utter woe!
Where pain of unextinguishable fire
Must exercise us without hope of end
The vassals of his anger, when the scourge
Inexorably, and the torturing hour,
Calls us to penance? More destroyed than thus,
We should be quite abolished, and expire.
What fear we then? what doubt we to incense
His utmost ire? which, to the height enraged,
Will either quite consume us, and reduce
To nothing this essential—happier far
Than miserable to have eternal being!—
Or, if our substance be indeed divine,
And cannot cease to be, we are at worst
On this side nothing; and by proof we feel
Our power sufficient to disturb his Heaven,
And with perpetual inroads to alarm,
Though inaccessible, his fatal throne:
Which, if not victory, is yet revenge.”
    He ended frowning, and his look denounced
Desperate revenge, and battle dangerous
To less than gods. On th’ other side up rose
Belial, in act more graceful and humane.
A fairer person lost not Heaven; he seemed
For dignity composed, and high exploit.
But all was false and hollow; though his tongue
Dropped manna, and could make the worse appear
The better reason, to perplex and dash
Maturest counsels: for his thoughts were low—
To vice industrious, but to nobler deeds
Timorous and slothful. Yet he pleased the ear,
And with persuasive accent thus began:—
    “I should be much for open war, O Peers,
As not behind in hate, if what was urged
Main reason to persuade immediate war
Did not dissuade me most, and seem to cast
Ominous conjecture on the whole success;
When he who most excels in fact of arms,
In what he counsels and in what excels
Mistrustful, grounds his courage on despair
And utter dissolution, as the scope
Of all his aim, after some dire revenge.
First, what revenge? The towers of Heaven are filled
With armed watch, that render all access
Impregnable: oft on the bordering Deep
Encamp their legions, or with obscure wing
Scout far and wide into the realm of Night,
Scorning surprise. Or, could we break our way
By force, and at our heels all Hell should rise
With blackest insurrection to confound
Heaven’s purest light, yet our great Enemy,
All incorruptible, would on his throne
Sit unpolluted, and th’ ethereal mould,
Incapable of stain, would soon expel
Her mischief, and purge off the baser fire,
Victorious. Thus repulsed, our final hope
Is flat despair: we must exasperate
Th’ Almighty Victor to spend all his rage;
And that must end us; that must be our cure—
To be no more. Sad cure! for who would lose,
Though full of pain, this intellectual being,
Those thoughts that wander through eternity,
To perish rather, swallowed up and lost
In the wide womb of uncreated Night,
Devoid of sense and motion? And who knows,
Let this be good, whether our angry Foe
Can give it, or will ever? How he can
Is doubtful; that he never will is sure.
Will he, so wise, let loose at once his ire,
Belike through impotence or unaware,
To give his enemies their wish, and end
Them in his anger whom his anger saves
To punish endless? “Wherefore cease we, then?”
Say they who counsel war; “we are decreed,
Reserved, and destined to eternal woe;
Whatever doing, what can we suffer more,
What can we suffer worse?” Is this, then, worst—
Thus sitting, thus consulting, thus in arms?
What when we fled amain, pursued and struck
With Heaven’s afflicting thunder, and besought
The Deep to shelter us? This Hell then seemed
A refuge from those wounds. Or when we lay
Chained on the burning lake? That sure was worse.
What if the breath that kindled those grim fires,
Awaked, should blow them into sevenfold rage,
And plunge us in the flames; or from above
Should intermitted vengeance arm again
His red right hand to plague us? What if all
Her stores were opened, and this firmament
Of Hell should spout her cataracts of fire,
Impendent horrors, threatening hideous fall
One day upon our heads; while we perhaps,
Designing or exhorting glorious war,
Caught in a fiery tempest, shall be hurled,
Each on his rock transfixed, the sport and prey
Or racking whirlwinds, or for ever sunk
Under yon boiling ocean, wrapt in chains,
There to converse with everlasting groans,
Unrespited, unpitied, unreprieved,
Ages of hopeless end? This would be worse.
War, therefore, open or concealed, alike
My voice dissuades; for what can force or guile
With him, or who deceive his mind, whose eye
Views all things at one view? He from Heaven’s height
All these our motions vain sees and derides,
Not more almighty to resist our might
Than wise to frustrate all our plots and wiles.
Shall we, then, live thus vile—the race of Heaven
Thus trampled, thus expelled, to suffer here
Chains and these torments? Better these than worse,
By my advice; since fate inevitable
Subdues us, and omnipotent decree,
The Victor’s will. To suffer, as to do,
Our strength is equal; nor the law unjust
That so ordains. This was at first resolved,
If we were wise, against so great a foe
Contending, and so doubtful what might fall.
I laugh when those who at the spear are bold
And venturous, if that fail them, shrink, and fear
What yet they know must follow—to endure
Exile, or ignominy, or bonds, or pain,
The sentence of their Conqueror. This is now
Our doom; which if we can sustain and bear,
Our Supreme Foe in time may much remit
His anger, and perhaps, thus far removed,
Not mind us not offending, satisfied
With what is punished; whence these raging fires
Will slacken, if his breath stir not their flames.
Our purer essence then will overcome
Their noxious vapour; or, inured, not feel;
Or, changed at length, and to the place conformed
In temper and in nature, will receive
Familiar the fierce heat; and, void of pain,
This horror will grow mild, this darkness light;
Besides what hope the never-ending flight
Of future days may bring, what chance, what change
Worth waiting—since our present lot appears
For happy though but ill, for ill not worst,
If we procure not to ourselves more woe.”
    Thus Belial, with words clothed in reason’s garb,
Counselled ignoble ease and peaceful sloth,
Not peace; and after him thus Mammon spake:—
    “Either to disenthrone the King of Heaven
We war, if war be best, or to regain
Our own right lost. Him to unthrone we then
May hope, when everlasting Fate shall yield
To fickle Chance, and Chaos judge the strife.
The former, vain to hope, argues as vain
The latter; for what place can be for us
Within Heaven’s bound, unless Heaven’s Lord supreme
We overpower? Suppose he should relent
And publish grace to all, on promise made
Of new subjection; with what eyes could we
Stand in his presence humble, and receive
Strict laws imposed, to celebrate his throne
With warbled hymns, and to his Godhead sing
Forced hallelujahs, while he lordly sits
Our envied sovereign, and his altar breathes
Ambrosial odours and ambrosial flowers,
Our servile offerings? This must be our task
In Heaven, this our delight. How wearisome
Eternity so spent in worship paid
To whom we hate! Let us not then pursue,
By force impossible, by leave obtained
Unacceptable, though in Heaven, our state
Of splendid vassalage; but rather seek
Our own good from ourselves, and from our own
Live to ourselves, though in this vast recess,
Free and to none accountable, preferring
Hard liberty before the easy yoke
Of servile pomp. Our greatness will appear
Then most conspicuous when great things of small,
Useful of hurtful, prosperous of adverse,
We can create, and in what place soe’er
Thrive under evil, and work ease out of pain
Through labour and endurance. This deep world
Of darkness do we dread? How oft amidst
Thick clouds and dark doth Heaven’s all-ruling Sire
Choose to reside, his glory unobscured,
And with the majesty of darkness round
Covers his throne, from whence deep thunders roar.
Mustering their rage, and Heaven resembles Hell!
As he our darkness, cannot we his light
Imitate when we please? This desert soil
Wants not her hidden lustre, gems and gold;
Nor want we skill or art from whence to raise
Magnificence; and what can Heaven show more?
Our torments also may, in length of time,
Become our elements, these piercing fires
As soft as now severe, our temper changed
Into their temper; which must needs remove
The sensible of pain. All things invite
To peaceful counsels, and the settled state
Of order, how in safety best we may
Compose our present evils, with regard
Of what we are and where, dismissing quite
All thoughts of war. Ye have what I advise.”
    He scarce had finished, when such murmur filled
Th’ assembly as when hollow rocks retain
The sound of blustering winds, which all night long
Had roused the sea, now with hoarse cadence lull
Seafaring men o’erwatched, whose bark by chance
Or pinnace, anchors in a craggy bay
After the tempest. Such applause was heard
As Mammon ended, and his sentence pleased,
Advising peace: for such another field
They dreaded worse than Hell; so much the fear
Of thunder and the sword of Michael
Wrought still within them; and no less desire
To found this nether empire, which might rise,
By policy and long process of time,
In emulation opposite to Heaven.
Which when Beelzebub perceived—than whom,
Satan except, none higher sat—with grave
Aspect he rose, and in his rising seemed
A pillar of state. Deep on his front engraven
Deliberation sat, and public care;
And princely counsel in his face yet shone,
Majestic, though in ruin. Sage he stood
With Atlantean shoulders, fit to bear
The weight of mightiest monarchies; his look
Drew audience and attention still as night
Or summer’s noontide air, while thus he spake:—
    “Thrones and Imperial Powers, Offspring of Heaven,
Ethereal Virtues! or these titles now
Must we renounce, and, changing style, be called
Princes of Hell? for so the popular vote
Inclines—here to continue, and build up here
A growing empire; doubtless! while we dream,
And know not that the King of Heaven hath doomed
This place our dungeon, not our safe retreat
Beyond his potent arm, to live exempt
From Heaven’s high jurisdiction, in new league
Banded against his throne, but to remain
In strictest bondage, though thus far removed,
Under th’ inevitable curb, reserved
His captive multitude. For he, to be sure,
In height or depth, still first and last will reign
Sole king, and of his kingdom lose no part
By our revolt, but over Hell extend
His empire, and with iron sceptre rule
Us here, as with his golden those in Heaven.
What sit we then projecting peace and war?
War hath determined us and foiled with loss
Irreparable; terms of peace yet none
Vouchsafed or sought; for what peace will be given
To us enslaved, but custody severe,
And stripes and arbitrary punishment
Inflicted? and what peace can we return,
But, to our power, hostility and hate,
Untamed reluctance, and revenge, though slow,
Yet ever plotting how the Conqueror least
May reap his conquest, and may least rejoice
In doing what we most in suffering feel?
Nor will occasion want, nor shall we need
With dangerous expedition to invade
Heaven, whose high walls fear no assault or siege,
Or ambush from the Deep. What if we find
Some easier enterprise? There is a place
(If ancient and prophetic fame in Heaven
Err not)—another World, the happy seat
Of some new race, called Man, about this time
To be created like to us, though less
In power and excellence, but favoured more
Of him who rules above; so was his will
Pronounced among the Gods, and by an oath
That shook Heaven’s whole circumference confirmed.
Thither let us bend all our thoughts, to learn
What creatures there inhabit, of what mould
Or substance, how endued, and what their power
And where their weakness: how attempted best,
By force of subtlety. Though Heaven be shut,
And Heaven’s high Arbitrator sit secure
In his own strength, this place may lie exposed,
The utmost border of his kingdom, left
To their defence who hold it: here, perhaps,
Some advantageous act may be achieved
By sudden onset—either with Hell-fire
To waste his whole creation, or possess
All as our own, and drive, as we were driven,
The puny habitants; or, if not drive,
Seduce them to our party, that their God
May prove their foe, and with repenting hand
Abolish his own works. This would surpass
Common revenge, and interrupt his joy
In our confusion, and our joy upraise
In his disturbance; when his darling sons,
Hurled headlong to partake with us, shall curse
Their frail original, and faded bliss—
Faded so soon! Advise if this be worth
Attempting, or to sit in darkness here
Hatching vain empires.” Thus Beelzebub
Pleaded his devilish counsel—first devised
By Satan, and in part proposed: for whence,
But from the author of all ill, could spring
So deep a malice, to confound the race
Of mankind in one root, and Earth with Hell
To mingle and involve, done all to spite
The great Creator? But their spite still serves
His glory to augment. The bold design
Pleased highly those infernal States, and joy
Sparkled in all their eyes: with full assent
They vote: whereat his speech he thus renews:—
“Well have ye judged, well ended long debate,
Synod of Gods, and, like to what ye are,
Great things resolved, which from the lowest deep
Will once more lift us up, in spite of fate,
Nearer our ancient seat—perhaps in view
Of those bright confines, whence, with neighbouring arms,
And opportune excursion, we may chance
Re-enter Heaven; or else in some mild zone
Dwell, not unvisited of Heaven’s fair light,
Secure, and at the brightening orient beam
Purge off this gloom: the soft delicious air,
To heal the scar of these corrosive fires,
Shall breathe her balm. But, first, whom shall we send
In search of this new World? whom shall we find
Sufficient? who shall tempt with wandering feet
The dark, unbottomed, infinite Abyss,
And through the palpable obscure find out
His uncouth way, or spread his airy flight,
Upborne with indefatigable wings
Over the vast abrupt, ere he arrive
The happy Isle? What strength, what art, can then
Suffice, or what evasion bear him safe,
Through the strict senteries and stations thick
Of Angels watching round? Here he had need
All circumspection: and we now no less
Choice in our suffrage; for on whom we send
The weight of all, and our last hope, relies.”
    This said, he sat; and expectation held
His look suspense, awaiting who appeared
To second, or oppose, or undertake
The perilous attempt. But all sat mute,
Pondering the danger with deep thoughts; and each
In other’s countenance read his own dismay,
Astonished. None among the choice and prime
Of those Heaven-warring champions could be found
So hardy as to proffer or accept,
Alone, the dreadful voyage; till, at last,
Satan, whom now transcendent glory raised
Above his fellows, with monarchal pride
Conscious of highest worth, unmoved thus spake:—
    “O Progeny of Heaven! Empyreal Thrones!
With reason hath deep silence and demur
Seized us, though undismayed. Long is the way
And hard, that out of Hell leads up to light.
Our prison strong, this huge convex of fire,
Outrageous to devour, immures us round
Ninefold; and gates of burning adamant,
Barred over us, prohibit all egress.
These passed, if any pass, the void profound
Of unessential Night receives him next,
Wide-gaping, and with utter loss of being
Threatens him, plunged in that abortive gulf.
If thence he scape, into whatever world,
Or unknown region, what remains him less
Than unknown dangers, and as hard escape?
But I should ill become this throne, O Peers,
And this imperial sovereignty, adorned
With splendour, armed with power, if aught proposed
And judged of public moment in the shape
Of difficulty or danger, could deter
Me from attempting. Wherefore do I assume
These royalties, and not refuse to reign,
Refusing to accept as great a share
Of hazard as of honour, due alike
To him who reigns, and so much to him due
Of hazard more as he above the rest
High honoured sits? Go, therefore, mighty Powers,
Terror of Heaven, though fallen; intend at home,
While here shall be our home, what best may ease
The present misery, and render Hell
More tolerable; if there be cure or charm
To respite, or deceive, or slack the pain
Of this ill mansion: intermit no watch
Against a wakeful foe, while I abroad
Through all the coasts of dark destruction seek
Deliverance for us all. This enterprise
None shall partake with me.” Thus saying, rose
The Monarch, and prevented all reply;
Prudent lest, from his resolution raised,
Others among the chief might offer now,
Certain to be refused, what erst they feared,
And, so refused, might in opinion stand
His rivals, winning cheap the high repute
Which he through hazard huge must earn. But they
Dreaded not more th’ adventure than his voice
Forbidding; and at once with him they rose.
Their rising all at once was as the sound
Of thunder heard remote. Towards him they bend
With awful reverence prone, and as a God
Extol him equal to the Highest in Heaven.
Nor failed they to express how much they praised
That for the general safety he despised
His own: for neither do the Spirits damned
Lose all their virtue; lest bad men should boast
Their specious deeds on earth, which glory excites,
Or close ambition varnished o’er with zeal.
    Thus they their doubtful consultations dark
Ended, rejoicing in their matchless Chief:
As, when from mountain-tops the dusky clouds
Ascending, while the north wind sleeps, o’erspread
Heaven’s cheerful face, the louring element
Scowls o’er the darkened landscape snow or shower,
If chance the radiant sun, with farewell sweet,
Extend his evening beam, the fields revive,
The birds their notes renew, and bleating herds
Attest their joy, that hill and valley rings.
O shame to men! Devil with devil damned
Firm concord holds; men only disagree
Of creatures rational, though under hope
Of heavenly grace, and, God proclaiming peace,
Yet live in hatred, enmity, and strife
Among themselves, and levy cruel wars
Wasting the earth, each other to destroy:
As if (which might induce us to accord)
Man had not hellish foes enow besides,
That day and night for his destruction wait!
    The Stygian council thus dissolved; and forth
In order came the grand infernal Peers:
Midst came their mighty Paramount, and seemed
Alone th’ antagonist of Heaven, nor less
Than Hell’s dread Emperor, with pomp supreme,
And god-like imitated state: him round
A globe of fiery Seraphim enclosed
With bright emblazonry, and horrent arms.
Then of their session ended they bid cry
With trumpet’s regal sound the great result:
Toward the four winds four speedy Cherubim
Put to their mouths the sounding alchemy,
By herald’s voice explained; the hollow Abyss
Heard far and wide, and all the host of Hell
With deafening shout returned them loud acclaim.
Thence more at ease their minds, and somewhat raised
By false presumptuous hope, the ranged Powers
Disband; and, wandering, each his several way
Pursues, as inclination or sad choice
Leads him perplexed, where he may likeliest find
Truce to his restless thoughts, and entertain
The irksome hours, till his great Chief return.
Part on the plain, or in the air sublime,
Upon the wing or in swift race contend,
As at th’ Olympian games or Pythian fields;
Part curb their fiery steeds, or shun the goal
With rapid wheels, or fronted brigades form:
As when, to warn proud cities, war appears
Waged in the troubled sky, and armies rush
To battle in the clouds; before each van
Prick forth the airy knights, and couch their spears,
Till thickest legions close; with feats of arms
From either end of heaven the welkin burns.
Others, with vast Typhoean rage, more fell,
Rend up both rocks and hills, and ride the air
In whirlwind; Hell scarce holds the wild uproar:—
As when Alcides, from Oechalia crowned
With conquest, felt th’ envenomed robe, and tore
Through pain up by the roots Thessalian pines,
And Lichas from the top of Oeta threw
Into th’ Euboic sea. Others, more mild,
Retreated in a silent valley, sing
With notes angelical to many a harp
Their own heroic deeds, and hapless fall
By doom of battle, and complain that Fate
Free Virtue should enthrall to Force or Chance.
Their song was partial; but the harmony
(What could it less when Spirits immortal sing?)
Suspended Hell, and took with ravishment
The thronging audience. In discourse more sweet
(For Eloquence the Soul, Song charms the Sense)
Others apart sat on a hill retired,
In thoughts more elevate, and reasoned high
Of Providence, Foreknowledge, Will, and Fate—
Fixed fate, free will, foreknowledge absolute,
And found no end, in wandering mazes lost.
Of good and evil much they argued then,
Of happiness and final misery,
Passion and apathy, and glory and shame:
Vain wisdom all, and false philosophy!—
Yet, with a pleasing sorcery, could charm
Pain for a while or anguish, and excite
Fallacious hope, or arm th’ obdured breast
With stubborn patience as with triple steel.
Another part, in squadrons and gross bands,
On bold adventure to discover wide
That dismal world, if any clime perhaps
Might yield them easier habitation, bend
Four ways their flying march, along the banks
Of four infernal rivers, that disgorge
Into the burning lake their baleful streams—
Abhorred Styx, the flood of deadly hate;
Sad Acheron of sorrow, black and deep;
Cocytus, named of lamentation loud
Heard on the rueful stream; fierce Phlegeton,
Whose waves of torrent fire inflame with rage.
Far off from these, a slow and silent stream,
Lethe, the river of oblivion, rolls
Her watery labyrinth, whereof who drinks
Forthwith his former state and being forgets—
Forgets both joy and grief, pleasure and pain.
Beyond this flood a frozen continent
Lies dark and wild, beat with perpetual storms
Of whirlwind and dire hail, which on firm land
Thaws not, but gathers heap, and ruin seems
Of ancient pile; all else deep snow and ice,
A gulf profound as that Serbonian bog
Betwixt Damiata and Mount Casius old,
Where armies whole have sunk: the parching air
Burns frore, and cold performs th’ effect of fire.
Thither, by harpy-footed Furies haled,
At certain revolutions all the damned
Are brought; and feel by turns the bitter change
Of fierce extremes, extremes by change more fierce,
From beds of raging fire to starve in ice
Their soft ethereal warmth, and there to pine
Immovable, infixed, and frozen round
Periods of time,—thence hurried back to fire.
They ferry over this Lethean sound
Both to and fro, their sorrow to augment,
And wish and struggle, as they pass, to reach
The tempting stream, with one small drop to lose
In sweet forgetfulness all pain and woe,
All in one moment, and so near the brink;
But Fate withstands, and, to oppose th’ attempt,
Medusa with Gorgonian terror guards
The ford, and of itself the water flies
All taste of living wight, as once it fled
The lip of Tantalus. Thus roving on
In confused march forlorn, th’ adventurous bands,
With shuddering horror pale, and eyes aghast,
Viewed first their lamentable lot, and found
No rest. Through many a dark and dreary vale
They passed, and many a region dolorous,
O’er many a frozen, many a fiery alp,
Rocks, caves, lakes, fens, bogs, dens, and shades of death—
A universe of death, which God by curse
Created evil, for evil only good;
Where all life dies, death lives, and Nature breeds,
Perverse, all monstrous, all prodigious things,
Obominable, inutterable, and worse
Than fables yet have feigned or fear conceived,
Gorgons, and Hydras, and Chimeras dire.
    Meanwhile the Adversary of God and Man,
Satan, with thoughts inflamed of highest design,
Puts on swift wings, and toward the gates of Hell
Explores his solitary flight: sometimes
He scours the right hand coast, sometimes the left;
Now shaves with level wing the deep, then soars
Up to the fiery concave towering high.
As when far off at sea a fleet descried
Hangs in the clouds, by equinoctial winds
Close sailing from Bengala, or the isles
Of Ternate and Tidore, whence merchants bring
Their spicy drugs; they on the trading flood,
Through the wide Ethiopian to the Cape,
Ply stemming nightly toward the pole: so seemed
Far off the flying Fiend. At last appear
Hell-bounds, high reaching to the horrid roof,
And thrice threefold the gates; three folds were brass,
Three iron, three of adamantine rock,
Impenetrable, impaled with circling fire,
Yet unconsumed. Before the gates there sat
On either side a formidable Shape.
The one seemed woman to the waist, and fair,
But ended foul in many a scaly fold,
Voluminous and vast—a serpent armed
With mortal sting. About her middle round
A cry of Hell-hounds never-ceasing barked
With wide Cerberean mouths full loud, and rung
A hideous peal; yet, when they list, would creep,
If aught disturbed their noise, into her womb,
And kennel there; yet there still barked and howled
Within unseen. Far less abhorred than these
Vexed Scylla, bathing in the sea that parts
Calabria from the hoarse Trinacrian shore;
Nor uglier follow the night-hag, when, called
In secret, riding through the air she comes,
Lured with the smell of infant blood, to dance
With Lapland witches, while the labouring moon
Eclipses at their charms. The other Shape—
If shape it might be called that shape had none
Distinguishable in member, joint, or limb;
Or substance might be called that shadow seemed,
For each seemed either—black it stood as Night,
Fierce as ten Furies, terrible as Hell,
And shook a dreadful dart: what seemed his head
The likeness of a kingly crown had on.
Satan was now at hand, and from his seat
The monster moving onward came as fast
With horrid strides; Hell trembled as he strode.
Th’ undaunted Fiend what this might be admired—
Admired, not feared (God and his Son except,
Created thing naught valued he nor shunned),
And with disdainful look thus first began:—
    “Whence and what art thou, execrable Shape,
That dar’st, though grim and terrible, advance
Thy miscreated front athwart my way
To yonder gates? Through them I mean to pass,
That be assured, without leave asked of thee.
Retire; or taste thy folly, and learn by proof,
Hell-born, not to contend with Spirits of Heaven.”
    To whom the Goblin, full of wrath, replied:—
“Art thou that traitor Angel? art thou he,
Who first broke peace in Heaven and faith, till then
Unbroken, and in proud rebellious arms
Drew after him the third part of Heaven’s sons,
Conjured against the Highest—for which both thou
And they, outcast from God, are here condemned
To waste eternal days in woe and pain?
And reckon’st thou thyself with Spirits of Heaven
Hell-doomed, and breath’st defiance here and scorn,
Where I reign king, and, to enrage thee more,
Thy king and lord? Back to thy punishment,
False fugitive; and to thy speed add wings,
Lest with a whip of scorpions I pursue
Thy lingering, or with one stroke of this dart
Strange horror seize thee, and pangs unfelt before.”
    So spake the grisly Terror, and in shape,
So speaking and so threatening, grew tenfold,
More dreadful and deform. On th’ other side,
Incensed with indignation, Satan stood
Unterrified, and like a comet burned,
That fires the length of Ophiuchus huge
In th’ arctic sky, and from his horrid hair
Shakes pestilence and war. Each at the head
Levelled his deadly aim; their fatal hands
No second stroke intend; and such a frown
Each cast at th’ other as when two black clouds,
With heaven’s artillery fraught, came rattling on
Over the Caspian,—then stand front to front
Hovering a space, till winds the signal blow
To join their dark encounter in mid-air.
So frowned the mighty combatants that Hell
Grew darker at their frown; so matched they stood;
For never but once more was wither like
To meet so great a foe. And now great deeds
Had been achieved, whereof all Hell had rung,
Had not the snaky Sorceress, that sat
Fast by Hell-gate and kept the fatal key,
Risen, and with hideous outcry rushed between.
    “O father, what intends thy hand,” she cried,
“Against thy only son? What fury, O son,
Possesses thee to bend that mortal dart
Against thy father’s head? And know’st for whom?
For him who sits above, and laughs the while
At thee, ordained his drudge to execute
Whate’er his wrath, which he calls justice, bids—
His wrath, which one day will destroy ye both!”
    She spake, and at her words the hellish Pest
Forbore: then these to her Satan returned:—
    “So strange thy outcry, and thy words so strange
Thou interposest, that my sudden hand,
Prevented, spares to tell thee yet by deeds
What it intends, till first I know of thee
What thing thou art, thus double-formed, and why,
In this infernal vale first met, thou call’st
Me father, and that phantasm call’st my son.
I know thee not, nor ever saw till now
Sight more detestable than him and thee.”
    T’ whom thus the Portress of Hell-gate replied:—
“Hast thou forgot me, then; and do I seem
Now in thine eye so foul?—once deemed so fair
In Heaven, when at th’ assembly, and in sight
Of all the Seraphim with thee combined
In bold conspiracy against Heaven’s King,
All on a sudden miserable pain
Surprised thee, dim thine eyes and dizzy swum
In darkness, while thy head flames thick and fast
Threw forth, till on the left side opening wide,
Likest to thee in shape and countenance bright,
Then shining heavenly fair, a goddess armed,
Out of thy head I sprung. Amazement seized
All th’ host of Heaven; back they recoiled afraid
At first, and called me Sin, and for a sign
Portentous held me; but, familiar grown,
I pleased, and with attractive graces won
The most averse—thee chiefly, who, full oft
Thyself in me thy perfect image viewing,
Becam’st enamoured; and such joy thou took’st
With me in secret that my womb conceived
A growing burden. Meanwhile war arose,
And fields were fought in Heaven: wherein remained
(For what could else?) to our Almighty Foe
Clear victory; to our part loss and rout
Through all the Empyrean. Down they fell,
Driven headlong from the pitch of Heaven, down
Into this Deep; and in the general fall
I also: at which time this powerful key
Into my hands was given, with charge to keep
These gates for ever shut, which none can pass
Without my opening. Pensive here I sat
Alone; but long I sat not, till my womb,
Pregnant by thee, and now excessive grown,
Prodigious motion felt and rueful throes.
At last this odious offspring whom thou seest,
Thine own begotten, breaking violent way,
Tore through my entrails, that, with fear and pain
Distorted, all my nether shape thus grew
Transformed: but he my inbred enemy
Forth issued, brandishing his fatal dart,
Made to destroy. I fled, and cried out Death!
Hell trembled at the hideous name, and sighed
From all her caves, and back resounded Death!
I fled; but he pursued (though more, it seems,
Inflamed with lust than rage), and, swifter far,
Me overtook, his mother, all dismayed,
And, in embraces forcible and foul
Engendering with me, of that rape begot
These yelling monsters, that with ceaseless cry
Surround me, as thou saw’st—hourly conceived
And hourly born, with sorrow infinite
To me; for, when they list, into the womb
That bred them they return, and howl, and gnaw
My bowels, their repast; then, bursting forth
Afresh, with conscious terrors vex me round,
That rest or intermission none I find.
Before mine eyes in opposition sits
Grim Death, my son and foe, who set them on,
And me, his parent, would full soon devour
For want of other prey, but that he knows
His end with mine involved, and knows that I
Should prove a bitter morsel, and his bane,
Whenever that shall be: so Fate pronounced.
But thou, O father, I forewarn thee, shun
His deadly arrow; neither vainly hope
To be invulnerable in those bright arms,
Through tempered heavenly; for that mortal dint,
Save he who reigns above, none can resist.”
    She finished; and the subtle Fiend his lore
Soon learned, now milder, and thus answered smooth:—
    “Dear daughter—since thou claim’st me for thy sire,
And my fair son here show’st me, the dear pledge
Of dalliance had with thee in Heaven, and joys
Then sweet, now sad to mention, through dire change
Befallen us unforeseen, unthought-of—know,
I come no enemy, but to set free
From out this dark and dismal house of pain
Both him and thee, and all the heavenly host
Of Spirits that, in our just pretences armed,
Fell with us from on high. From them I go
This uncouth errand sole, and one for all
Myself expose, with lonely steps to tread
Th’ unfounded Deep, and through the void immense
To search, with wandering quest, a place foretold
Should be—and, by concurring signs, ere now
Created vast and round—a place of bliss
In the purlieus of Heaven; and therein placed
A race of upstart creatures, to supply
Perhaps our vacant room, though more removed,
Lest Heaven, surcharged with potent multitude,
Might hap to move new broils. Be this, or aught
Than this more secret, now designed, I haste
To know; and, this once known, shall soon return,
And bring ye to the place where thou and Death
Shall dwell at ease, and up and down unseen
Wing silently the buxom air, embalmed
With odours. There ye shall be fed and filled
Immeasurably; all things shall be your prey.”
    He ceased; for both seemed highly pleased, and Death
Grinned horrible a ghastly smile, to hear
His famine should be filled, and blessed his maw
Destined to that good hour. No less rejoiced
His mother bad, and thus bespake her sire:—
    “The key of this infernal Pit, by due
And by command of Heaven’s all-powerful King,
I keep, by him forbidden to unlock
These adamantine gates; against all force
Death ready stands to interpose his dart,
Fearless to be o’ermatched by living might.
But what owe I to his commands above,
Who hates me, and hath hither thrust me down
Into this gloom of Tartarus profound,
To sit in hateful office here confined,
Inhabitant of Heaven and heavenly born—
Here in perpetual agony and pain,
With terrors and with clamours compassed round
Of mine own brood, that on my bowels feed?
Thou art my father, thou my author, thou
My being gav’st me; whom should I obey
But thee? whom follow? Thou wilt bring me soon
To that new world of light and bliss, among
The gods who live at ease, where I shall reign
At thy right hand voluptuous, as beseems
Thy daughter and thy darling, without end.”
    Thus saying, from her side the fatal key,
Sad instrument of all our woe, she took;
And, towards the gate rolling her bestial train,
Forthwith the huge portcullis high up-drew,
Which, but herself, not all the Stygian Powers
Could once have moved; then in the key-hole turns
Th’ intricate wards, and every bolt and bar
Of massy iron or solid rock with ease
Unfastens. On a sudden open fly,
With impetuous recoil and jarring sound,
Th’ infernal doors, and on their hinges grate
Harsh thunder, that the lowest bottom shook
Of Erebus. She opened; but to shut
Excelled her power: the gates wide open stood,
That with extended wings a bannered host,
Under spread ensigns marching, might pass through
With horse and chariots ranked in loose array;
So wide they stood, and like a furnace-mouth
Cast forth redounding smoke and ruddy flame.
Before their eyes in sudden view appear
The secrets of the hoary Deep—a dark
Illimitable ocean, without bound,
Without dimension; where length, breadth, and height,
And time, and place, are lost; where eldest Night
And Chaos, ancestors of Nature, hold
Eternal anarchy, amidst the noise
Of endless wars, and by confusion stand.
For Hot, Cold, Moist, and Dry, four champions fierce,
Strive here for mastery, and to battle bring
Their embryon atoms: they around the flag
Of each his faction, in their several clans,
Light-armed or heavy, sharp, smooth, swift, or slow,
Swarm populous, unnumbered as the sands
Of Barca or Cyrene’s torrid soil,
Levied to side with warring winds, and poise
Their lighter wings. To whom these most adhere
He rules a moment: Chaos umpire sits,
And by decision more embroils the fray
By which he reigns: next him, high arbiter,
Chance governs all. Into this wild Abyss,
The womb of Nature, and perhaps her grave,
Of neither sea, nor shore, nor air, nor fire,
But all these in their pregnant causes mixed
Confusedly, and which thus must ever fight,
Unless th’ Almighty Maker them ordain
His dark materials to create more worlds—
Into this wild Abyss the wary Fiend
Stood on the brink of Hell and looked a while,
Pondering his voyage; for no narrow frith
He had to cross. Nor was his ear less pealed
With noises loud and ruinous (to compare
Great things with small) than when Bellona storms
With all her battering engines, bent to rase
Some capital city; or less than if this frame
Of Heaven were falling, and these elements
In mutiny had from her axle torn
The steadfast Earth. At last his sail-broad vans
He spread for flight, and, in the surging smoke
Uplifted, spurns the ground; thence many a league,
As in a cloudy chair, ascending rides
Audacious; but, that seat soon failing, meets
A vast vacuity. All unawares,
Fluttering his pennons vain, plumb-down he drops
Ten thousand fathom deep, and to this hour
Down had been falling, had not, by ill chance,
The strong rebuff of some tumultuous cloud,
Instinct with fire and nitre, hurried him
As many miles aloft. That fury stayed—
Quenched in a boggy Syrtis, neither sea,
Nor good dry land—nigh foundered, on he fares,
Treading the crude consistence, half on foot,
Half flying; behoves him now both oar and sail.
As when a gryphon through the wilderness
With winged course, o’er hill or moory dale,
Pursues the Arimaspian, who by stealth
Had from his wakeful custody purloined
The guarded gold; so eagerly the Fiend
O’er bog or steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,
With head, hands, wings, or feet, pursues his way,
And swims, or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies.
At length a universal hubbub wild
Of stunning sounds, and voices all confused,
Borne through the hollow dark, assaults his ear
With loudest vehemence. Thither he plies
Undaunted, to meet there whatever Power
Or Spirit of the nethermost Abyss
Might in that noise reside, of whom to ask
Which way the nearest coast of darkness lies
Bordering on light; when straight behold the throne
Of Chaos, and his dark pavilion spread
Wide on the wasteful Deep! With him enthroned
Sat sable-vested Night, eldest of things,
The consort of his reign; and by them stood
Orcus and Ades, and the dreaded name
Of Demogorgon; Rumour next, and Chance,
And Tumult, and Confusion, all embroiled,
And Discord with a thousand various mouths.
    T’ whom Satan, turning boldly, thus:—“Ye Powers
And Spirits of this nethermost Abyss,
Chaos and ancient Night, I come no spy
With purpose to explore or to disturb
The secrets of your realm; but, by constraint
Wandering this darksome desert, as my way
Lies through your spacious empire up to light,
Alone and without guide, half lost, I seek,
What readiest path leads where your gloomy bounds
Confine with Heaven; or, if some other place,
From your dominion won, th’ Ethereal King
Possesses lately, thither to arrive
I travel this profound. Direct my course:
Directed, no mean recompense it brings
To your behoof, if I that region lost,
All usurpation thence expelled, reduce
To her original darkness and your sway
(Which is my present journey), and once more
Erect the standard there of ancient Night.
Yours be th’ advantage all, mine the revenge!”
    Thus Satan; and him thus the Anarch old,
With faltering speech and visage incomposed,
Answered: “I know thee, stranger, who thou art—
That mighty leading Angel, who of late
Made head against Heaven’s King, though overthrown.
I saw and heard; for such a numerous host
Fled not in silence through the frighted Deep,
With ruin upon ruin, rout on rout,
Confusion worse confounded; and Heaven-gates
Poured out by millions her victorious bands,
Pursuing. I upon my frontiers here
Keep residence; if all I can will serve
That little which is left so to defend,
Encroached on still through our intestine broils
Weakening the sceptre of old Night: first, Hell,
Your dungeon, stretching far and wide beneath;
Now lately Heaven and Earth, another world
Hung o’er my realm, linked in a golden chain
To that side Heaven from whence your legions fell!
If that way be your walk, you have not far;
So much the nearer danger. Go, and speed;
Havoc, and spoil, and ruin, are my gain.”
    He ceased; and Satan stayed not to reply,
But, glad that now his sea should find a shore,
With fresh alacrity and force renewed
Springs upward, like a pyramid of fire,
Into the wild expanse, and through the shock
Of fighting elements, on all sides round
Environed, wins his way; harder beset
And more endangered than when Argo passed
Through Bosporus betwixt the justling rocks,
Or when Ulysses on the larboard shunned
Charybdis, and by th’ other whirlpool steered.
So he with difficulty and labour hard
Moved on, with difficulty and labour he;
But, he once passed, soon after, when Man fell,
Strange alteration! Sin and Death amain,
Following his track (such was the will of Heaven)
Paved after him a broad and beaten way
Over the dark Abyss, whose boiling gulf
Tamely endured a bridge of wondrous length,
From Hell continued, reaching th’ utmost orb
Of this frail World; by which the Spirits perverse
With easy intercourse pass to and fro
To tempt or punish mortals, except whom
God and good Angels guard by special grace.
    But now at last the sacred influence
Of light appears, and from the walls of Heaven
Shoots far into the bosom of dim Night
A glimmering dawn. Here Nature first begins
Her farthest verge, and Chaos to retire,
As from her outmost works, a broken foe,
With tumult less and with less hostile din;
That Satan with less toil, and now with ease,
Wafts on the calmer wave by dubious light,
And, like a weather-beaten vessel, holds
Gladly the port, though shrouds and tackle torn;
Or in the emptier waste, resembling air,
Weighs his spread wings, at leisure to behold
Far off th’ empyreal Heaven, extended wide
In circuit, undetermined square or round,
With opal towers and battlements adorned
Of living sapphire, once his native seat;
And, fast by, hanging in a golden chain,
This pendent World, in bigness as a star
Of smallest magnitude close by the moon.
Thither, full fraught with mischievous revenge,
Accursed, and in a cursed hour, he hies.







Hail, holy Light, offspring of Heaven firstborn,
Or of the Eternal coeternal beam
May I express thee unblam’d? since God is light,
And never but in unapproached light
Dwelt from eternity, dwelt then in thee
Bright effluence of bright essence increate.
Or hear’st thou rather pure ethereal stream,
Whose fountain who shall tell? before the sun,
Before the Heavens thou wert, and at the voice
Of God, as with a mantle, didst invest
The rising world of waters dark and deep,
Won from the void and formless infinite.
Thee I re-visit now with bolder wing,
Escap’d the Stygian pool, though long detain’d
In that obscure sojourn, while in my flight
Through utter and through middle darkness borne,
With other notes than to the Orphean lyre
I sung of Chaos and eternal Night;
Taught by the heavenly Muse to venture down
The dark descent, and up to re-ascend,
Though hard and rare: Thee I revisit safe,
And feel thy sovran vital lamp; but thou
Revisit’st not these eyes, that roll in vain
To find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn;
So thick a drop serene hath quench’d their orbs,
Or dim suffusion veil’d. Yet not the more
Cease I to wander, where the Muses haunt,
Clear spring, or shady grove, or sunny hill,
Smit with the love of sacred song; but chief
Thee, Sion, and the flowery brooks beneath,
That wash thy hallow’d feet, and warbling flow,
Nightly I visit: nor sometimes forget
So were I equall’d with them in renown,
Thy sovran command, that Man should find grace;
Blind Thamyris, and blind Maeonides,
And Tiresias, and Phineus, prophets old:
Then feed on thoughts, that voluntary move
Harmonious numbers; as the wakeful bird
Sings darkling, and in shadiest covert hid
Tunes her nocturnal note. Thus with the year
Seasons return; but not to me returns
Day, or the sweet approach of even or morn,
Or sight of vernal bloom, or summer’s rose,
Or flocks, or herds, or human face divine;
But cloud instead, and ever-during dark
Surrounds me, from the cheerful ways of men
Cut off, and for the book of knowledge fair
Presented with a universal blank
Of nature’s works to me expung’d and ras’d,
And wisdom at one entrance quite shut out.
So much the rather thou, celestial Light,
Shine inward, and the mind through all her powers
Irradiate; there plant eyes, all mist from thence
Purge and disperse, that I may see and tell
Of things invisible to mortal sight.
Now had the Almighty Father from above,
From the pure empyrean where he sits
High thron’d above all highth, bent down his eye
His own works and their works at once to view:
About him all the Sanctities of Heaven
Stood thick as stars, and from his sight receiv’d
Beatitude past utterance; on his right
The radiant image of his glory sat,
His only son; on earth he first beheld
Our two first parents, yet the only two
Of mankind in the happy garden plac’d
Reaping immortal fruits of joy and love,
Uninterrupted joy, unrivall’d love,
In blissful solitude; he then survey’d
Hell and the gulf between, and Satan there
Coasting the wall of Heaven on this side Night
In the dun air sublime, and ready now
To stoop with wearied wings, and willing feet,
On the bare outside of this world, that seem’d
Firm land imbosom’d, without firmament,
Uncertain which, in ocean or in air.
Him God beholding from his prospect high,
Wherein past, present, future, he beholds,
Thus to his only Son foreseeing spake.
Only begotten Son, seest thou what rage
Transports our Adversary? whom no bounds
Prescrib’d no bars of Hell, nor all the chains
Heap’d on him there, nor yet the main abyss
Wide interrupt, can hold; so bent he seems
On desperate revenge, that shall redound
Upon his own rebellious head. And now,
Through all restraint broke loose, he wings his way
Not far off Heaven, in the precincts of light,
Directly towards the new created world,
And man there plac’d, with purpose to assay
If him by force he can destroy, or, worse,
By some false guile pervert; and shall pervert;
For man will hearken to his glozing lies,
And easily transgress the sole command,
Sole pledge of his obedience: So will fall
He and his faithless progeny: Whose fault?
Whose but his own? ingrate, he had of me
All he could have; I made him just and right,
Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall.
Such I created all the ethereal Powers
And Spirits, both them who stood, and them who fail’d;
Freely they stood who stood, and fell who fell.
Not free, what proof could they have given sincere
Of true allegiance, constant faith or love,
Where only what they needs must do appear’d,
Not what they would? what praise could they receive?
What pleasure I from such obedience paid,
When will and reason (reason also is choice)
Useless and vain, of freedom both despoil’d,
Made passive both, had serv’d necessity,
Not me. They therefore, as to right belong’d,
So were created, nor can justly accuse
Their Maker, or their making, or their fate,
As if predestination over-rul’d
Their will dispos’d by absolute decree
Or high foreknowledge they themselves decreed
Their own revolt, not I; if I foreknew,
Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault,
Which had no less proved certain unforeknown.
So without least impulse or shadow of fate,
Or aught by me immutably foreseen,
They trespass, authors to themselves in all
Both what they judge, and what they choose; for so
I form’d them free: and free they must remain,
Till they enthrall themselves; I else must change
Their nature, and revoke the high decree
Unchangeable, eternal, which ordain’d
Their freedom: they themselves ordain’d their fall.
The first sort by their own suggestion fell,
Self-tempted, self-deprav’d: Man falls, deceiv’d
By the other first: Man therefore shall find grace,
The other none: In mercy and justice both,
Through Heaven and Earth, so shall my glory excel;
But Mercy, first and last, shall brightest shine.
Thus while God spake, ambrosial fragrance fill’d
All Heaven, and in the blessed Spirits elect
Sense of new joy ineffable diffus’d.
Beyond compare the Son of God was seen
Most glorious; in him all his Father shone
Substantially express’d; and in his face
Divine compassion visibly appear’d,
Love without end, and without measure grace,
Which uttering, thus he to his Father spake.
O Father, gracious was that word which clos’d
Thy sovran command, that Man should find grace;
For which both Heaven and earth shall high extol
Thy praises, with the innumerable sound
Of hymns and sacred songs, wherewith thy throne
Encompass’d shall resound thee ever blest.
For should Man finally be lost, should Man,
Thy creature late so lov’d, thy youngest son,
Fall circumvented thus by fraud, though join’d
With his own folly? that be from thee far,
That far be from thee, Father, who art judge
Of all things made, and judgest only right.
Or shall the Adversary thus obtain
His end, and frustrate thine? shall he fulfill
His malice, and thy goodness bring to nought,
Or proud return, though to his heavier doom,
Yet with revenge accomplish’d, and to Hell
Draw after him the whole race of mankind,
By him corrupted? or wilt thou thyself
Abolish thy creation, and unmake
For him, what for thy glory thou hast made?
So should thy goodness and thy greatness both
Be question’d and blasphem’d without defence.
To whom the great Creator thus replied.
O son, in whom my soul hath chief delight,
Son of my bosom, Son who art alone.
My word, my wisdom, and effectual might,
All hast thou spoken as my thoughts are, all
As my eternal purpose hath decreed;
Man shall not quite be lost, but sav’d who will;
Yet not of will in him, but grace in me
Freely vouchsaf’d; once more I will renew
His lapsed powers, though forfeit; and enthrall’d
By sin to foul exorbitant desires;
Upheld by me, yet once more he shall stand
On even ground against his mortal foe;
By me upheld, that he may know how frail
His fallen condition is, and to me owe
All his deliverance, and to none but me.
Some I have chosen of peculiar grace,
Elect above the rest; so is my will:
The rest shall hear me call, and oft be warn’d
Their sinful state, and to appease betimes
The incensed Deity, while offer’d grace
Invites; for I will clear their senses dark,
What may suffice, and soften stony hearts
To pray, repent, and bring obedience due.
To prayer, repentance, and obedience due,
Though but endeavour’d with sincere intent,
Mine ear shall not be slow, mine eye not shut.
And I will place within them as a guide,
My umpire Conscience; whom if they will hear,
Light after light, well us’d, they shall attain,
And to the end, persisting, safe arrive.
This my long sufferance, and my day of grace,
They who neglect and scorn, shall never taste;
But hard be harden’d, blind be blinded more,
That they may stumble on, and deeper fall;
And none but such from mercy I exclude.
But yet all is not done; Man disobeying,
Disloyal, breaks his fealty, and sins
Against the high supremacy of Heaven,
Affecting God-head, and, so losing all,
To expiate his treason hath nought left,
But to destruction sacred and devote,
He, with his whole posterity, must die,
Die he or justice must; unless for him
Some other able, and as willing, pay
The rigid satisfaction, death for death.
Say, heavenly Powers, where shall we find such love?
Which of you will be mortal, to redeem
Man’s mortal crime, and just the unjust to save?
Dwells in all Heaven charity so dear?
He ask’d, but all the heavenly quire stood mute,
And silence was in Heaven: on Man’s behalf
Patron or intercessour none appear’d,
Much less that durst upon his own head draw
The deadly forfeiture, and ransom set.
And now without redemption all mankind
Must have been lost, adjudg’d to Death and Hell
By doom severe, had not the Son of God,
In whom the fulness dwells of love divine,
His dearest mediation thus renew’d.
Father, thy word is past, Man shall find grace;
And shall grace not find means, that finds her way,
The speediest of thy winged messengers,
To visit all thy creatures, and to all
Comes unprevented, unimplor’d, unsought?
Happy for Man, so coming; he her aid
Can never seek, once dead in sins, and lost;
Atonement for himself, or offering meet,
Indebted and undone, hath none to bring;
Behold me then: me for him, life for life
I offer: on me let thine anger fall;
Account me Man; I for his sake will leave
Thy bosom, and this glory next to thee
Freely put off, and for him lastly die
Well pleased; on me let Death wreak all his rage.
Under his gloomy power I shall not long
Lie vanquished. Thou hast given me to possess
Life in myself for ever; by thee I live;
Though now to Death I yield, and am his due,
All that of me can die, yet, that debt paid,
Thou wilt not leave me in the loathsome grave
His prey, nor suffer my unspotted soul
For ever with corruption there to dwell;
But I shall rise victorious, and subdue
My vanquisher, spoiled of his vaunted spoil.
Death his death’s wound shall then receive, and stoop
Inglorious, of his mortal sting disarmed;
I through the ample air in triumph high
Shall lead Hell captive maugre Hell, and show
The powers of darkness bound. Thou, at the sight
Pleased, out of Heaven shalt look down and smile,
While, by thee raised, I ruin all my foes;
Death last, and with his carcase glut the grave;
Then, with the multitude of my redeemed,
Shall enter Heaven, long absent, and return,
Father, to see thy face, wherein no cloud
Of anger shall remain, but peace assured
And reconcilement: wrath shall be no more
Thenceforth, but in thy presence joy entire.
    His words here ended; but his meek aspect
Silent yet spake, and breathed immortal love
To mortal men, above which only shone
Filial obedience: as a sacrifice
Glad to be offered, he attends the will
Of his great Father. Admiration seized
All Heaven, what this might mean, and whither tend,
Wondering; but soon th’ Almighty thus replied:
    O thou in Heaven and Earth the only peace
Found out for mankind under wrath, O thou
My sole complacence! Well thou know’st how dear
To me are all my works; nor Man the least,
Though last created, that for him I spare
Thee from my bosom and right hand, to save,
By losing thee a while, the whole race lost.
Thou, therefore, whom thou only canst redeem,
Their nature also to thy nature join;
And be thyself Man among men on Earth,
Made flesh, when time shall be, of virgin seed,
By wondrous birth; be thou in Adam’s room
The head of all mankind, though Adam’s son.
As in him perish all men, so in thee,
As from a second root, shall be restored
As many as are restored, without thee none.
His crime makes guilty all his sons; thy merit,
Imputed, shall absolve them who renounce
Their own both righteous and unrighteous deeds,
And live in thee transplanted, and from thee
Receive new life. So Man, as is most just,
Shall satisfy for Man, be judged and die,
And dying rise, and rising with him raise
His brethren, ransomed with his own dear life.
So heavenly love shall outdo hellish hate,
Giving to death, and dying to redeem,
So dearly to redeem what hellish hate
So easily destroyed, and still destroys
In those who, when they may, accept not grace.
Nor shalt thou, by descending to assume
Man’s nature, lessen or degrade thine own.
Because thou hast, though throned in highest bliss
Equal to God, and equally enjoying
God-like fruition, quitted all, to save
A world from utter loss, and hast been found
By merit more than birthright Son of God,
Found worthiest to be so by being good,
Far more than great or high; because in thee
Love hath abounded more than glory abounds;
Therefore thy humiliation shall exalt
With thee thy manhood also to this throne:
Here shalt thou sit incarnate, here shalt reign
Both God and Man, Son both of God and Man,
Anointed universal King; all power
I give thee; reign for ever, and assume
Thy merits; under thee, as head supreme,
Thrones, Princedoms, Powers, Dominions, I reduce:
All knees to thee shall bow, of them that bide
In Heaven, or Earth, or under Earth in Hell.
When thou, attended gloriously from Heaven,
Shalt in the sky appear, and from thee send
The summoning Arch-Angels to proclaim
Thy dread tribunal; forthwith from all winds,
The living, and forthwith the cited dead
Of all past ages, to the general doom
Shall hasten; such a peal shall rouse their sleep.
Then, all thy saints assembled, thou shalt judge
Bad Men and Angels; they, arraigned, shall sink
Beneath thy sentence; Hell, her numbers full,
Thenceforth shall be for ever shut. Mean while
The world shall burn, and from her ashes spring
New Heaven and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell,
And, after all their tribulations long,
See golden days, fruitful of golden deeds,
With joy and peace triumphing, and fair truth.
Then thou thy regal scepter shalt lay by,
For regal scepter then no more shall need,
God shall be all in all. But, all ye Gods,
Adore him, who to compass all this dies;
Adore the Son, and honour him as me.
No sooner had the Almighty ceased, but all
The multitude of Angels, with a shout
Loud as from numbers without number, sweet
As from blest voices, uttering joy, Heaven rung
With jubilee, and loud Hosannas filled
The eternal regions: Lowly reverent
Towards either throne they bow, and to the ground
With solemn adoration down they cast
Their crowns inwove with amarant and gold;
Immortal amarant, a flower which once
In Paradise, fast by the tree of life,
Began to bloom; but soon for man’s offence
To Heaven removed, where first it grew, there grows,
And flowers aloft shading the fount of life,
And where the river of bliss through midst of Heaven
Rolls o’er Elysian flowers her amber stream;
With these that never fade the Spirits elect
Bind their resplendent locks inwreathed with beams;
Now in loose garlands thick thrown off, the bright
Pavement, that like a sea of jasper shone,
Impurpled with celestial roses smiled.
Then, crowned again, their golden harps they took,
Harps ever tuned, that glittering by their side
Like quivers hung, and with preamble sweet
Of charming symphony they introduce
Their sacred song, and waken raptures high;
No voice exempt, no voice but well could join
Melodious part, such concord is in Heaven.
Thee, Father, first they sung Omnipotent,
Immutable, Immortal, Infinite,
Eternal King; the Author of all being,
Fountain of light, thyself invisible
Amidst the glorious brightness where thou sit’st
Throned inaccessible, but when thou shadest
The full blaze of thy beams, and, through a cloud
Drawn round about thee like a radiant shrine,
Dark with excessive bright thy skirts appear,
Yet dazzle Heaven, that brightest Seraphim
Approach not, but with both wings veil their eyes.
Thee next they sang of all creation first,
Begotten Son, Divine Similitude,
In whose conspicuous countenance, without cloud
Made visible, the Almighty Father shines,
Whom else no creature can behold; on thee
Impressed the effulgence of his glory abides,
Transfused on thee his ample Spirit rests.
He Heaven of Heavens and all the Powers therein
By thee created; and by thee threw down
The aspiring Dominations: Thou that day
Thy Father’s dreadful thunder didst not spare,
Nor stop thy flaming chariot-wheels, that shook
Heaven’s everlasting frame, while o’er the necks
Thou drovest of warring Angels disarrayed.
Back from pursuit thy Powers with loud acclaim
Thee only extolled, Son of thy Father’s might,
To execute fierce vengeance on his foes,
Not so on Man: Him through their malice fallen,
Father of mercy and grace, thou didst not doom
So strictly, but much more to pity incline:
No sooner did thy dear and only Son
Perceive thee purposed not to doom frail Man
So strictly, but much more to pity inclined,
He to appease thy wrath, and end the strife
Of mercy and justice in thy face discerned,
Regardless of the bliss wherein he sat
Second to thee, offered himself to die
For Man’s offence. O unexampled love,
Love no where to be found less than Divine!
Hail, Son of God, Saviour of Men! Thy name
Shall be the copious matter of my song
Henceforth, and never shall my heart thy praise
Forget, nor from thy Father’s praise disjoin.
Thus they in Heaven, above the starry sphere,
Their happy hours in joy and hymning spent.
Mean while upon the firm opacous globe
Of this round world, whose first convex divides
The luminous inferiour orbs, enclosed
From Chaos, and the inroad of Darkness old,
Satan alighted walks: A globe far off
It seemed, now seems a boundless continent
Dark, waste, and wild, under the frown of Night
Starless exposed, and ever-threatening storms
Of Chaos blustering round, inclement sky;
Save on that side which from the wall of Heaven,
Though distant far, some small reflection gains
Of glimmering air less vexed with tempest loud:
Here walked the Fiend at large in spacious field.
As when a vultur on Imaus bred,
Whose snowy ridge the roving Tartar bounds,
Dislodging from a region scarce of prey
To gorge the flesh of lambs or yeanling kids,
On hills where flocks are fed, flies toward the springs
Of Ganges or Hydaspes, Indian streams;
But in his way lights on the barren plains
Of Sericana, where Chineses drive
With sails and wind their cany waggons light:
So, on this windy sea of land, the Fiend
Walked up and down alone, bent on his prey;
Alone, for other creature in this place,
Living or lifeless, to be found was none;
None yet, but store hereafter from the earth
Up hither like aereal vapours flew
Of all things transitory and vain, when sin
With vanity had filled the works of men:
Both all things vain, and all who in vain things
Built their fond hopes of glory or lasting fame,
Or happiness in this or the other life;
All who have their reward on earth, the fruits
Of painful superstition and blind zeal,
Nought seeking but the praise of men, here find
Fit retribution, empty as their deeds;
All the unaccomplished works of Nature’s hand,
Abortive, monstrous, or unkindly mixed,
Dissolved on earth, fleet hither, and in vain,
Till final dissolution, wander here;
Not in the neighbouring moon as some have dreamed;
Those argent fields more likely habitants,
Translated Saints, or middle Spirits hold
Betwixt the angelical and human kind.
Hither of ill-joined sons and daughters born
First from the ancient world those giants came
With many a vain exploit, though then renowned:
The builders next of Babel on the plain
Of Sennaar, and still with vain design,
New Babels, had they wherewithal, would build:
Others came single; he, who, to be deemed
A God, leaped fondly into Aetna flames,
Empedocles; and he, who, to enjoy
Plato’s Elysium, leaped into the sea,
Cleombrotus; and many more too long,
Embryos, and idiots, eremites, and friars
White, black, and gray, with all their trumpery.
Here pilgrims roam, that strayed so far to seek
In Golgotha him dead, who lives in Heaven;
And they, who to be sure of Paradise,
Dying, put on the weeds of Dominick,
Or in Franciscan think to pass disguised;
They pass the planets seven, and pass the fixed,
And that crystalling sphere whose balance weighs
The trepidation talked, and that first moved;
And now Saint Peter at Heaven’s wicket seems
To wait them with his keys, and now at foot
Of Heaven’s ascent they lift their feet, when lo
A violent cross wind from either coast
Blows them transverse, ten thousand leagues awry
Into the devious air: Then might ye see
Cowls, hoods, and habits, with their wearers, tost
And fluttered into rags; then reliques, beads,
Indulgences, dispenses, pardons, bulls,
The sport of winds: All these, upwhirled aloft,
Fly o’er the backside of the world far off
Into a Limbo large and broad, since called
The Paradise of Fools, to few unknown
Long after; now unpeopled, and untrod.
All this dark globe the Fiend found as he passed,
And long he wandered, till at last a gleam
Of dawning light turned thither-ward in haste
His travelled steps: far distant he descries
Ascending by degrees magnificent
Up to the wall of Heaven a structure high;
At top whereof, but far more rich, appeared
The work as of a kingly palace-gate,
With frontispiece of diamond and gold
Embellished; thick with sparkling orient gems
The portal shone, inimitable on earth
By model, or by shading pencil, drawn.
These stairs were such as whereon Jacob saw
Angels ascending and descending, bands
Of guardians bright, when he from Esau fled
To Padan-Aram, in the field of Luz
Dreaming by night under the open sky
And waking cried, This is the gate of Heaven.
Each stair mysteriously was meant, nor stood
There always, but drawn up to Heaven sometimes
Viewless; and underneath a bright sea flowed
Of jasper, or of liquid pearl, whereon
Who after came from earth, failing arrived
Wafted by Angels, or flew o’er the lake
Rapt in a chariot drawn by fiery steeds.
The stairs were then let down, whether to dare
The Fiend by easy ascent, or aggravate
His sad exclusion from the doors of bliss:
Direct against which opened from beneath,
Just o’er the blissful seat of Paradise,
A passage down to the Earth, a passage wide,
Wider by far than that of after-times
Over mount Sion, and, though that were large,
Over the Promised Land to God so dear;
By which, to visit oft those happy tribes,
On high behests his angels to and fro
Passed frequent, and his eye with choice regard
From Paneas, the fount of Jordan’s flood,
To Beersaba, where the Holy Land
Borders on Egypt and the Arabian shore;
So wide the opening seemed, where bounds were set
To darkness, such as bound the ocean wave.
Satan from hence, now on the lower stair,
That scaled by steps of gold to Heaven-gate,
Looks down with wonder at the sudden view
Of all this world at once. As when a scout,
Through dark and desert ways with peril gone
All night; at last by break of cheerful dawn
Obtains the brow of some high-climbing hill,
Which to his eye discovers unaware
The goodly prospect of some foreign land
First seen, or some renowned metropolis
With glistering spires and pinnacles adorned,
Which now the rising sun gilds with his beams:
Such wonder seised, though after Heaven seen,
The Spirit malign, but much more envy seised,
At sight of all this world beheld so fair.
Round he surveys (and well might, where he stood
So high above the circling canopy
Of night’s extended shade,) from eastern point
Of Libra to the fleecy star that bears
Andromeda far off Atlantick seas
Beyond the horizon; then from pole to pole
He views in breadth, and without longer pause
Down right into the world’s first region throws
His flight precipitant, and winds with ease
Through the pure marble air his oblique way
Amongst innumerable stars, that shone
Stars distant, but nigh hand seemed other worlds;
Or other worlds they seemed, or happy isles,
Like those Hesperian gardens famed of old,
Fortunate fields, and groves, and flowery vales,
Thrice happy isles; but who dwelt happy there
He staid not to inquire: Above them all
The golden sun, in splendour likest Heaven,
Allured his eye; thither his course he bends
Through the calm firmament, (but up or down,
By center, or eccentrick, hard to tell,
Or longitude,) where the great luminary
Aloof the vulgar constellations thick,
That from his lordly eye keep distance due,
Dispenses light from far; they, as they move
Their starry dance in numbers that compute
Days, months, and years, towards his all-cheering lamp
Turn swift their various motions, or are turned
By his magnetick beam, that gently warms
The universe, and to each inward part
With gentle penetration, though unseen,
Shoots invisible virtue even to the deep;
So wonderously was set his station bright.
There lands the Fiend, a spot like which perhaps
Astronomer in the sun’s lucent orb
Through his glazed optick tube yet never saw.
The place he found beyond expression bright,
Compared with aught on earth, metal or stone;
Not all parts like, but all alike informed
With radiant light, as glowing iron with fire;
If metal, part seemed gold, part silver clear;
If stone, carbuncle most or chrysolite,
Ruby or topaz, to the twelve that shone
In Aaron’s breast-plate, and a stone besides
Imagined rather oft than elsewhere seen,
That stone, or like to that which here below
Philosophers in vain so long have sought,
In vain, though by their powerful art they bind
Volatile Hermes, and call up unbound
In various shapes old Proteus from the sea,
Drained through a limbeck to his native form.
What wonder then if fields and regions here
Breathe forth Elixir pure, and rivers run
Potable gold, when with one virtuous touch
The arch-chemick sun, so far from us remote,
Produces, with terrestrial humour mixed,
Here in the dark so many precious things
Of colour glorious, and effect so rare?
Here matter new to gaze the Devil met
Undazzled; far and wide his eye commands;
For sight no obstacle found here, nor shade,
But all sun-shine, as when his beams at noon
Culminate from the equator, as they now
Shot upward still direct, whence no way round
Shadow from body opaque can fall; and the air,
No where so clear, sharpened his visual ray
To objects distant far, whereby he soon
Saw within ken a glorious Angel stand,
The same whom John saw also in the sun:
His back was turned, but not his brightness hid;
Of beaming sunny rays a golden tiar
Circled his head, nor less his locks behind
Illustrious on his shoulders fledge with wings
Lay waving round; on some great charge employed
He seemed, or fixed in cogitation deep.
Glad was the Spirit impure, as now in hope
To find who might direct his wandering flight
To Paradise, the happy seat of Man,
His journey’s end and our beginning woe.
But first he casts to change his proper shape,
Which else might work him danger or delay:
And now a stripling Cherub he appears,
Not of the prime, yet such as in his face
Youth smiled celestial, and to every limb
Suitable grace diffused, so well he feigned:
Under a coronet his flowing hair
In curls on either cheek played; wings he wore
Of many a coloured plume, sprinkled with gold;
His habit fit for speed succinct, and held
Before his decent steps a silver wand.
He drew not nigh unheard; the Angel bright,
Ere he drew nigh, his radiant visage turned,
Admonished by his ear, and straight was known
The Arch-Angel Uriel, one of the seven
Who in God’s presence, nearest to his throne,
Stand ready at command, and are his eyes
That run through all the Heavens, or down to the Earth
Bear his swift errands over moist and dry,
O’er sea and land: him Satan thus accosts.
Uriel, for thou of those seven Spirits that stand
In sight of God’s high throne, gloriously bright,
The first art wont his great authentick will
Interpreter through highest Heaven to bring,
Where all his sons thy embassy attend;
And here art likeliest by supreme decree
Like honour to obtain, and as his eye
To visit oft this new creation round;
Unspeakable desire to see, and know
All these his wonderous works, but chiefly Man,
His chief delight and favour, him for whom
All these his works so wonderous he ordained,
Hath brought me from the quires of Cherubim
Alone thus wandering. Brightest Seraph, tell
In which of all these shining orbs hath Man
His fixed seat, or fixed seat hath none,
But all these shining orbs his choice to dwell;
That I may find him, and with secret gaze
Or open admiration him behold,
On whom the great Creator hath bestowed
Worlds, and on whom hath all these graces poured;
That both in him and all things, as is meet,
The universal Maker we may praise;
Who justly hath driven out his rebel foes
To deepest Hell, and, to repair that loss,
Created this new happy race of Men
To serve him better: Wise are all his ways.
So spake the false dissembler unperceived;
For neither Man nor Angel can discern
Hypocrisy, the only evil that walks
Invisible, except to God alone,
By his permissive will, through Heaven and Earth:
And oft, though wisdom wake, suspicion sleeps
At wisdom’s gate, and to simplicity
Resigns her charge, while goodness thinks no ill
Where no ill seems: Which now for once beguiled
Uriel, though regent of the sun, and held
The sharpest-sighted Spirit of all in Heaven;
Who to the fraudulent impostor foul,
In his uprightness, answer thus returned.
Fair Angel, thy desire, which tends to know
The works of God, thereby to glorify
The great Work-master, leads to no excess
That reaches blame, but rather merits praise
The more it seems excess, that led thee hither
From thy empyreal mansion thus alone,
To witness with thine eyes what some perhaps,
Contented with report, hear only in Heaven:
For wonderful indeed are all his works,
Pleasant to know, and worthiest to be all
Had in remembrance always with delight;
But what created mind can comprehend
Their number, or the wisdom infinite
That brought them forth, but hid their causes deep?
I saw when at his word the formless mass,
This world’s material mould, came to a heap:
Confusion heard his voice, and wild uproar
Stood ruled, stood vast infinitude confined;
Till at his second bidding Darkness fled,
Light shone, and order from disorder sprung:
Swift to their several quarters hasted then
The cumbrous elements, earth, flood, air, fire;
And this ethereal quintessence of Heaven
Flew upward, spirited with various forms,
That rolled orbicular, and turned to stars
Numberless, as thou seest, and how they move;
Each had his place appointed, each his course;
The rest in circuit walls this universe.
Look downward on that globe, whose hither side
With light from hence, though but reflected, shines;
That place is Earth, the seat of Man; that light
His day, which else, as the other hemisphere,
Night would invade; but there the neighbouring moon
(So call that opposite fair star) her aid
Timely interposes, and her monthly round
Still ending, still renewing, through mid Heaven,
With borrowed light her countenance triform
Hence fills and empties to enlighten the Earth,
And in her pale dominion checks the night.
That spot, to which I point, is Paradise,
Adam’s abode; those lofty shades, his bower.
Thy way thou canst not miss, me mine requires.
Thus said, he turned; and Satan, bowing low,
As to superiour Spirits is wont in Heaven,
Where honour due and reverence none neglects,
Took leave, and toward the coast of earth beneath,
Down from the ecliptick, sped with hoped success,
Throws his steep flight in many an aery wheel;
Nor staid, till on Niphates’ top he lights.







O, for that warning voice, which he, who saw
The Apocalypse, heard cry in Heaven aloud,
Then when the Dragon, put to second rout,
Came furious down to be revenged on men,
Woe to the inhabitants on earth! that now,
While time was, our first parents had been warned
The coming of their secret foe, and ’scaped,
Haply so ’scaped his mortal snare: For now
Satan, now first inflamed with rage, came down,
The tempter ere the accuser of mankind,
To wreak on innocent frail Man his loss
Of that first battle, and his flight to Hell:
Yet, not rejoicing in his speed, though bold
Far off and fearless, nor with cause to boast,
Begins his dire attempt; which nigh the birth
Now rolling boils in his tumultuous breast,
And like a devilish engine back recoils
Upon himself; horrour and doubt distract
His troubled thoughts, and from the bottom stir
The Hell within him; for within him Hell
He brings, and round about him, nor from Hell
One step, no more than from himself, can fly
By change of place: Now conscience wakes despair,
That slumbered; wakes the bitter memory
Of what he was, what is, and what must be
Worse; of worse deeds worse sufferings must ensue.
Sometimes towards Eden, which now in his view
Lay pleasant, his grieved look he fixes sad;
Sometimes towards Heaven, and the full-blazing sun,
Which now sat high in his meridian tower:
Then, much revolving, thus in sighs began.
O thou, that, with surpassing glory crowned,
Lookest from thy sole dominion like the God
Of this new world; at whose sight all the stars
Hide their diminished heads; to thee I call,
But with no friendly voice, and add thy name,
Of Sun! to tell thee how I hate thy beams,
That bring to my remembrance from what state
I fell, how glorious once above thy sphere;
Till pride and worse ambition threw me down
Warring in Heaven against Heaven’s matchless King:
Ah, wherefore! he deserved no such return
From me, whom he created what I was
In that bright eminence, and with his good
Upbraided none; nor was his service hard.
What could be less than to afford him praise,
The easiest recompence, and pay him thanks,
How due! yet all his good proved ill in me,
And wrought but malice; lifted up so high
I ’sdeined subjection, and thought one step higher
Would set me highest, and in a moment quit
The debt immense of endless gratitude,
So burdensome still paying, still to owe,
Forgetful what from him I still received,
And understood not that a grateful mind
By owing owes not, but still pays, at once
Indebted and discharged; what burden then
O, had his powerful destiny ordained
Me some inferiour Angel, I had stood
Then happy; no unbounded hope had raised
Ambition! Yet why not some other Power
As great might have aspired, and me, though mean,
Drawn to his part; but other Powers as great
Fell not, but stand unshaken, from within
Or from without, to all temptations armed.
Hadst thou the same free will and power to stand?
Thou hadst: whom hast thou then or what to accuse,
But Heaven’s free love dealt equally to all?
Be then his love accursed, since love or hate,
To me alike, it deals eternal woe.
Nay, cursed be thou; since against his thy will
Chose freely what it now so justly rues.
Me miserable! which way shall I fly
Infinite wrath, and infinite despair?
Which way I fly is Hell; myself am Hell;
And, in the lowest deep, a lower deep
Still threatening to devour me opens wide,
To which the Hell I suffer seems a Heaven.
O, then, at last relent: Is there no place
Left for repentance, none for pardon left?
None left but by submission; and that word
Disdain forbids me, and my dread of shame
Among the Spirits beneath, whom I seduced
With other promises and other vaunts
Than to submit, boasting I could subdue
The Omnipotent. Ay me! they little know
How dearly I abide that boast so vain,
Under what torments inwardly I groan,
While they adore me on the throne of Hell.
With diadem and scepter high advanced,
The lower still I fall, only supreme
In misery: Such joy ambition finds.
But say I could repent, and could obtain,
By act of grace, my former state; how soon
Would highth recall high thoughts, how soon unsay
What feigned submission swore? Ease would recant
Vows made in pain, as violent and void.
For never can true reconcilement grow,
Where wounds of deadly hate have pierced so deep:
Which would but lead me to a worse relapse
And heavier fall: so should I purchase dear
Short intermission bought with double smart.
This knows my Punisher; therefore as far
From granting he, as I from begging, peace;
All hope excluded thus, behold, instead
Of us out-cast, exil’d, his new delight,
Mankind created, and for him this world.
So farewell, hope; and with hope farewell, fear;
Farewell, remorse! all good to me is lost;
Evil, be thou my good; by thee at least
Divided empire with Heaven’s King I hold,
By thee, and more than half perhaps will reign;
As Man ere long, and this new world, shall know.
Thus while he spake, each passion dimmed his face
Thrice changed with pale, ire, envy, and despair;
Which marred his borrowed visage, and betrayed
Him counterfeit, if any eye beheld.
For heavenly minds from such distempers foul
Are ever clear. Whereof he soon aware,
Each perturbation smoothed with outward calm,
Artificer of fraud; and was the first
That practised falsehood under saintly show,
Deep malice to conceal, couched with revenge:
Yet not enough had practised to deceive
Uriel once warned; whose eye pursued him down
The way he went, and on the Assyrian mount
Saw him disfigured, more than could befall
Spirit of happy sort; his gestures fierce
He marked and mad demeanour, then alone,
As he supposed, all unobserved, unseen.
So on he fares, and to the border comes
Of Eden, where delicious Paradise,
Now nearer, crowns with her enclosure green,
As with a rural mound, the champaign head
Of a steep wilderness, whose hairy sides
With thicket overgrown, grotesque and wild,
Access denied; and overhead upgrew
Insuperable height of loftiest shade,
Cedar, and pine, and fir, and branching palm,
A sylvan scene, and, as the ranks ascend,
Shade above shade, a woody theatre
Of stateliest view. Yet higher than their tops
The verdurous wall of Paradise upsprung;
Which to our general sire gave prospect large
Into his nether empire neighbouring round.
And higher than that wall a circling row
Of goodliest trees, loaden with fairest fruit,
Blossoms and fruits at once of golden hue,
Appeared, with gay enamelled colours mixed:
On which the sun more glad impressed his beams
Than in fair evening cloud, or humid bow,
When God hath showered the earth; so lovely seemed
That landskip: And of pure now purer air
Meets his approach, and to the heart inspires
Vernal delight and joy, able to drive
All sadness but despair: Now gentle gales,
Fanning their odoriferous wings, dispense
Native perfumes, and whisper whence they stole
Those balmy spoils. As when to them who fail
Beyond the Cape of Hope, and now are past
Mozambick, off at sea north-east winds blow
Sabean odours from the spicy shore
Of Araby the blest; with such delay
Well pleased they slack their course, and many a league
Cheered with the grateful smell old Ocean smiles:
So entertained those odorous sweets the Fiend,
Who came their bane; though with them better pleased
Than Asmodeus with the fishy fume
That drove him, though enamoured, from the spouse
Of Tobit’s son, and with a vengeance sent
From Media post to Egypt, there fast bound.
Now to the ascent of that steep savage hill
Satan had journeyed on, pensive and slow;
But further way found none, so thick entwined,
As one continued brake, the undergrowth
Of shrubs and tangling bushes had perplexed
All path of man or beast that passed that way.
One gate there only was, and that looked east
On the other side: which when the arch-felon saw,
Due entrance he disdained; and, in contempt,
At one flight bound high over-leaped all bound
Of hill or highest wall, and sheer within
Lights on his feet. As when a prowling wolf,
Whom hunger drives to seek new haunt for prey,
Watching where shepherds pen their flocks at eve
In hurdled cotes amid the field secure,
Leaps o’er the fence with ease into the fold:
Or as a thief, bent to unhoard the cash
Of some rich burgher, whose substantial doors,
Cross-barred and bolted fast, fear no assault,
In at the window climbs, or o’er the tiles:
So clomb this first grand thief into God’s fold;
So since into his church lewd hirelings climb.
Thence up he flew, and on the tree of life,
The middle tree and highest there that grew,
Sat like a cormorant; yet not true life
Thereby regained, but sat devising death
To them who lived; nor on the virtue thought
Of that life-giving plant, but only used
For prospect, what well used had been the pledge
Of immortality. So little knows
Any, but God alone, to value right
The good before him, but perverts best things
To worst abuse, or to their meanest use.
Beneath him with new wonder now he views,
To all delight of human sense exposed,
In narrow room, Nature’s whole wealth, yea more,
A Heaven on Earth: For blissful Paradise
Of God the garden was, by him in the east
Of Eden planted; Eden stretched her line
From Auran eastward to the royal towers
Of great Seleucia, built by Grecian kings,
Or where the sons of Eden long before
Dwelt in Telassar: In this pleasant soil
His far more pleasant garden God ordained;
Out of the fertile ground he caused to grow
All trees of noblest kind for sight, smell, taste;
And all amid them stood the tree of life,
High eminent, blooming ambrosial fruit
Of vegetable gold; and next to life,
Our death, the tree of knowledge, grew fast by,
Knowledge of good bought dear by knowing ill.
Southward through Eden went a river large,
Nor changed his course, but through the shaggy hill
Passed underneath ingulfed; for God had thrown
That mountain as his garden-mould high raised
Upon the rapid current, which, through veins
Of porous earth with kindly thirst up-drawn,
Rose a fresh fountain, and with many a rill
Watered the garden; thence united fell
Down the steep glade, and met the nether flood,
Which from his darksome passage now appears,
And now, divided into four main streams,
Runs diverse, wandering many a famous realm
And country, whereof here needs no account;
But rather to tell how, if Art could tell,
How from that sapphire fount the crisped brooks,
Rolling on orient pearl and sands of gold,
With mazy errour under pendant shades
Ran nectar, visiting each plant, and fed
Flowers worthy of Paradise, which not nice Art
In beds and curious knots, but Nature boon
Poured forth profuse on hill, and dale, and plain,
Both where the morning sun first warmly smote
The open field, and where the unpierced shade
Imbrowned the noontide bowers: Thus was this place
A happy rural seat of various view;
Groves whose rich trees wept odorous gums and balm,
Others whose fruit, burnished with golden rind,
Hung amiable, Hesperian fables true,
If true, here only, and of delicious taste:
Betwixt them lawns, or level downs, and flocks
Grazing the tender herb, were interposed,
Or palmy hillock; or the flowery lap
Of some irriguous valley spread her store,
Flowers of all hue, and without thorn the rose:
Another side, umbrageous grots and caves
Of cool recess, o’er which the mantling vine
Lays forth her purple grape, and gently creeps
Luxuriant; mean while murmuring waters fall
Down the slope hills, dispersed, or in a lake,
That to the fringed bank with myrtle crowned
Her crystal mirrour holds, unite their streams.
The birds their quire apply; airs, vernal airs,
Breathing the smell of field and grove, attune
The trembling leaves, while universal Pan,
Knit with the Graces and the Hours in dance,
Led on the eternal Spring. Not that fair field
Of Enna, where Proserpine gathering flowers,
Herself a fairer flower by gloomy Dis
Was gathered, which cost Ceres all that pain
To seek her through the world; nor that sweet grove
Of Daphne by Orontes, and the inspired
Castalian spring, might with this Paradise
Of Eden strive; nor that Nyseian isle
Girt with the river Triton, where old Cham,
Whom Gentiles Ammon call and Libyan Jove,
Hid Amalthea, and her florid son
Young Bacchus, from his stepdame Rhea’s eye;
Nor where Abassin kings their issue guard,
Mount Amara, though this by some supposed
True Paradise under the Ethiop line
By Nilus’ head, enclosed with shining rock,
A whole day’s journey high, but wide remote
From this Assyrian garden, where the Fiend
Saw, undelighted, all delight, all kind
Of living creatures, new to sight, and strange
Two of far nobler shape, erect and tall,
Godlike erect, with native honour clad
In naked majesty seemed lords of all:
And worthy seemed; for in their looks divine
The image of their glorious Maker shone,
Truth, wisdom, sanctitude severe and pure,
(Severe, but in true filial freedom placed,)
Whence true authority in men; though both
Not equal, as their sex not equal seemed;
For contemplation he and valour formed;
For softness she and sweet attractive grace;
He for God only, she for God in him:
His fair large front and eye sublime declared
Absolute rule; and hyacinthine locks
Round from his parted forelock manly hung
Clustering, but not beneath his shoulders broad:
She, as a veil, down to the slender waist
Her unadorned golden tresses wore
Dishevelled, but in wanton ringlets waved
As the vine curls her tendrils, which implied
Subjection, but required with gentle sway,
And by her yielded, by him best received,
Yielded with coy submission, modest pride,
And sweet, reluctant, amorous delay.
Nor those mysterious parts were then concealed;
Then was not guilty shame, dishonest shame
Of nature’s works, honour dishonourable,
Sin-bred, how have ye troubled all mankind
With shows instead, mere shows of seeming pure,
And banished from man’s life his happiest life,
Simplicity and spotless innocence!
So passed they naked on, nor shunned the sight
Of God or Angel; for they thought no ill:
So hand in hand they passed, the loveliest pair,
That ever since in love’s embraces met;
Adam the goodliest man of men since born
His sons, the fairest of her daughters Eve.
Under a tuft of shade that on a green
Stood whispering soft, by a fresh fountain side
They sat them down; and, after no more toil
Of their sweet gardening labour than sufficed
To recommend cool Zephyr, and made ease
More easy, wholesome thirst and appetite
More grateful, to their supper-fruits they fell,
Nectarine fruits which the compliant boughs
Yielded them, side-long as they sat recline
On the soft downy bank damasked with flowers:
The savoury pulp they chew, and in the rind,
Still as they thirsted, scoop the brimming stream;
Nor gentle purpose, nor endearing smiles
Wanted, nor youthful dalliance, as beseems
Fair couple, linked in happy nuptial league,
Alone as they. About them frisking played
All beasts of the earth, since wild, and of all chase
In wood or wilderness, forest or den;
Sporting the lion ramped, and in his paw
Dandled the kid; bears, tigers, ounces, pards,
Gambolled before them; the unwieldy elephant,
To make them mirth, used all his might, and wreathed
His lithe proboscis; close the serpent sly,
Insinuating, wove with Gordian twine
His braided train, and of his fatal guile
Gave proof unheeded; others on the grass
Couched, and now filled with pasture gazing sat,
Or bedward ruminating; for the sun,
Declined, was hasting now with prone career
To the ocean isles, and in the ascending scale
Of Heaven the stars that usher evening rose:
When Satan still in gaze, as first he stood,
Scarce thus at length failed speech recovered sad.
O Hell! what do mine eyes with grief behold!
Into our room of bliss thus high advanced
Creatures of other mould, earth-born perhaps,
Not Spirits, yet to heavenly Spirits bright
Little inferiour; whom my thoughts pursue
With wonder, and could love, so lively shines
In them divine resemblance, and such grace
The hand that formed them on their shape hath poured.
Ah! gentle pair, ye little think how nigh
Your change approaches, when all these delights
Will vanish, and deliver ye to woe;
More woe, the more your taste is now of joy;
Happy, but for so happy ill secured
Long to continue, and this high seat your Heaven
Ill fenced for Heaven to keep out such a foe
As now is entered; yet no purposed foe
To you, whom I could pity thus forlorn,
Though I unpitied: League with you I seek,
And mutual amity, so strait, so close,
That I with you must dwell, or you with me
Henceforth; my dwelling haply may not please,
Like this fair Paradise, your sense; yet such
Accept your Maker’s work; he gave it me,
Which I as freely give: Hell shall unfold,
To entertain you two, her widest gates,
And send forth all her kings; there will be room,
Not like these narrow limits, to receive
Your numerous offspring; if no better place,
Thank him who puts me loth to this revenge
On you who wrong me not for him who wronged.
And should I at your harmless innocence
Melt, as I do, yet publick reason just,
Honour and empire with revenge enlarged,
By conquering this new world, compels me now
To do what else, though damned, I should abhor.
So spake the Fiend, and with necessity,
The tyrant’s plea, excused his devilish deeds.
Then from his lofty stand on that high tree
Down he alights among the sportful herd
Of those four-footed kinds, himself now one,
Now other, as their shape served best his end
Nearer to view his prey, and, unespied,
To mark what of their state he more might learn,
By word or action marked. About them round
A lion now he stalks with fiery glare;
Then as a tiger, who by chance hath spied
In some purlieu two gentle fawns at play,
Straight couches close, then, rising, changes oft
His couchant watch, as one who chose his ground,
Whence rushing, he might surest seize them both,
Griped in each paw: when, Adam first of men
To first of women Eve thus moving speech,
Turned him, all ear to hear new utterance flow.
Sole partner, and sole part, of all these joys,
Dearer thyself than all; needs must the Power
That made us, and for us this ample world,
Be infinitely good, and of his good
As liberal and free as infinite;
That raised us from the dust, and placed us here
In all this happiness, who at his hand
Have nothing merited, nor can perform
Aught whereof he hath need; he who requires
From us no other service than to keep
This one, this easy charge, of all the trees
In Paradise that bear delicious fruit
So various, not to taste that only tree
Of knowledge, planted by the tree of life;
So near grows death to life, whate’er death is,
Some dreadful thing no doubt; for well thou knowest
God hath pronounced it death to taste that tree,
The only sign of our obedience left,
Among so many signs of power and rule
Conferred upon us, and dominion given
Over all other creatures that possess
Earth, air, and sea. Then let us not think hard
One easy prohibition, who enjoy
Free leave so large to all things else, and choice
Unlimited of manifold delights:
But let us ever praise him, and extol
His bounty, following our delightful task,
To prune these growing plants, and tend these flowers,
Which were it toilsome, yet with thee were sweet.
To whom thus Eve replied. O thou for whom
And from whom I was formed, flesh of thy flesh,
And without whom am to no end, my guide
And head! what thou hast said is just and right.
For we to him indeed all praises owe,
And daily thanks; I chiefly, who enjoy
So far the happier lot, enjoying thee
Pre-eminent by so much odds, while thou
Like consort to thyself canst no where find.
That day I oft remember, when from sleep
I first awaked, and found myself reposed
Under a shade on flowers, much wondering where
And what I was, whence thither brought, and how.
Not distant far from thence a murmuring sound
Of waters issued from a cave, and spread
Into a liquid plain, then stood unmoved
Pure as the expanse of Heaven; I thither went
With unexperienced thought, and laid me down
On the green bank, to look into the clear
Smooth lake, that to me seemed another sky.
As I bent down to look, just opposite
A shape within the watery gleam appeared,
Bending to look on me: I started back,
It started back; but pleased I soon returned,
Pleased it returned as soon with answering looks
Of sympathy and love: There I had fixed
Mine eyes till now, and pined with vain desire,
Had not a voice thus warned me; “What thou seest,
What there thou seest, fair Creature, is thyself;
With thee it came and goes: but follow me,
And I will bring thee where no shadow stays
Thy coming, and thy soft embraces, he
Whose image thou art; him thou shalt enjoy
Inseparably thine, to him shalt bear
Multitudes like thyself, and thence be called
Mother of human race.” What could I do,
But follow straight, invisibly thus led?
Till I espied thee, fair indeed and tall,
Under a platane; yet methought less fair,
Less winning soft, less amiably mild,
Than that smooth watery image: Back I turned;
Thou following cryedst aloud, “Return, fair Eve;
Whom flyest thou? whom thou flyest, of him thou art,
His flesh, his bone; to give thee being I lent
Out of my side to thee, nearest my heart,
Substantial life, to have thee by my side
Henceforth an individual solace dear;
Part of my soul I seek thee, and thee claim
My other half:” With that thy gentle hand
Seised mine: I yielded; and from that time see
How beauty is excelled by manly grace,
And wisdom, which alone is truly fair.
So spake our general mother, and with eyes
Of conjugal attraction unreproved,
And meek surrender, half-embracing leaned
On our first father; half her swelling breast
Naked met his, under the flowing gold
Of her loose tresses hid: he in delight
Both of her beauty, and submissive charms,
Smiled with superiour love, as Jupiter
On Juno smiles, when he impregns the clouds
That shed Mayflowers; and pressed her matron lip
With kisses pure: Aside the Devil turned
For envy; yet with jealous leer malign
Eyed them askance, and to himself thus plained.
Sight hateful, sight tormenting! thus these two,
Imparadised in one another’s arms,
The happier Eden, shall enjoy their fill
Of bliss on bliss; while I to Hell am thrust,
Where neither joy nor love, but fierce desire,
Among our other torments not the least,
Still unfulfilled with pain of longing pines.
Yet let me not forget what I have gained
From their own mouths: All is not theirs, it seems;
One fatal tree there stands, of knowledge called,
Forbidden them to taste: Knowledge forbidden
Suspicious, reasonless. Why should their Lord
Envy them that? Can it be sin to know?
Can it be death? And do they only stand
By ignorance? Is that their happy state,
The proof of their obedience and their faith?
O fair foundation laid whereon to build
Their ruin! hence I will excite their minds
With more desire to know, and to reject
Envious commands, invented with design
To keep them low, whom knowledge might exalt
Equal with Gods: aspiring to be such,
They taste and die: What likelier can ensue
But first with narrow search I must walk round
This garden, and no corner leave unspied;
A chance but chance may lead where I may meet
Some wandering Spirit of Heaven by fountain side,
Or in thick shade retired, from him to draw
What further would be learned. Live while ye may,
Yet happy pair; enjoy, till I return,
Short pleasures, for long woes are to succeed!
So saying, his proud step he scornful turned,
But with sly circumspection, and began
Through wood, through waste, o’er hill, o’er dale, his roam
Mean while in utmost longitude, where Heaven
With earth and ocean meets, the setting sun
Slowly descended, and with right aspect
Against the eastern gate of Paradise
Levelled his evening rays: It was a rock
Of alabaster, piled up to the clouds,
Conspicuous far, winding with one ascent
Accessible from earth, one entrance high;
The rest was craggy cliff, that overhung
Still as it rose, impossible to climb.
Betwixt these rocky pillars Gabriel sat,
Chief of the angelick guards, awaiting night;
About him exercised heroick games
The unarmed youth of Heaven, but nigh at hand
Celestial armoury, shields, helms, and spears,
Hung high with diamond flaming, and with gold.
Thither came Uriel, gliding through the even
On a sun-beam, swift as a shooting star
In autumn thwarts the night, when vapours fired
Impress the air, and shows the mariner
From what point of his compass to beware
Impetuous winds: He thus began in haste.
Gabriel, to thee thy course by lot hath given
Charge and strict watch, that to this happy place
No evil thing approach or enter in.
This day at highth of noon came to my sphere
A Spirit, zealous, as he seemed, to know
More of the Almighty’s works, and chiefly Man,
God’s latest image: I described his way
Bent all on speed, and marked his aery gait;
But in the mount that lies from Eden north,
Where he first lighted, soon discerned his looks
Alien from Heaven, with passions foul obscured:
Mine eye pursued him still, but under shade
Lost sight of him: One of the banished crew,
I fear, hath ventured from the deep, to raise
New troubles; him thy care must be to find.
To whom the winged warriour thus returned.
Uriel, no wonder if thy perfect sight,
Amid the sun’s bright circle where thou sitst,
See far and wide: In at this gate none pass
The vigilance here placed, but such as come
Well known from Heaven; and since meridian hour
No creature thence: If Spirit of other sort,
So minded, have o’er-leaped these earthly bounds
On purpose, hard thou knowest it to exclude
Spiritual substance with corporeal bar.
But if within the circuit of these walks,
In whatsoever shape he lurk, of whom
Thou tellest, by morrow dawning I shall know.
So promised he; and Uriel to his charge
Returned on that bright beam, whose point now raised
Bore him slope downward to the sun now fallen
Beneath the Azores; whether the prime orb,
Incredible how swift, had thither rolled
Diurnal, or this less volubil earth,
By shorter flight to the east, had left him there
Arraying with reflected purple and gold
The clouds that on his western throne attend.
Now came still Evening on, and Twilight gray
Had in her sober livery all things clad;
Silence accompanied; for beast and bird,
They to their grassy couch, these to their nests
Were slunk, all but the wakeful nightingale;
She all night long her amorous descant sung;
Silence was pleased: Now glowed the firmament
With living sapphires: Hesperus, that led
The starry host, rode brightest, till the moon,
Rising in clouded majesty, at length
Apparent queen unveiled her peerless light,
And o’er the dark her silver mantle threw.
When Adam thus to Eve. Fair Consort, the hour
Of night, and all things now retired to rest,
Mind us of like repose; since God hath set
Labour and rest, as day and night, to men
Successive; and the timely dew of sleep,
Now falling with soft slumbrous weight, inclines
Our eye-lids: Other creatures all day long
Rove idle, unemployed, and less need rest;
Man hath his daily work of body or mind
Appointed, which declares his dignity,
And the regard of Heaven on all his ways;
While other animals unactive range,
And of their doings God takes no account.
To-morrow, ere fresh morning streak the east
With first approach of light, we must be risen,
And at our pleasant labour, to reform
Yon flowery arbours, yonder alleys green,
Our walk at noon, with branches overgrown,
That mock our scant manuring, and require
More hands than ours to lop their wanton growth:
Those blossoms also, and those dropping gums,
That lie bestrown, unsightly and unsmooth,
Ask riddance, if we mean to tread with ease;
Mean while, as Nature wills, night bids us rest.
To whom thus Eve, with perfect beauty adorned
My Author and Disposer, what thou bidst
Unargued I obey: So God ordains;
God is thy law, thou mine: To know no more
Is woman’s happiest knowledge, and her praise.
With thee conversing I forget all time;
All seasons, and their change, all please alike.
Sweet is the breath of Morn, her rising sweet,
With charm of earliest birds: pleasant the sun,
When first on this delightful land he spreads
His orient beams, on herb, tree, fruit, and flower,
Glistering with dew; fragrant the fertile earth
After soft showers; and sweet the coming on
Of grateful Evening mild; then silent Night,
With this her solemn bird, and this fair moon,
And these the gems of Heaven, her starry train:
But neither breath of Morn, when she ascends
With charm of earliest birds; nor rising sun
On this delightful land; nor herb, fruit, flower,
Glistering with dew; nor fragrance after showers;
Nor grateful Evening mild; nor silent Night,
With this her solemn bird, nor walk by moon,
Or glittering star-light, without thee is sweet.
But wherefore all night long shine these? for whom
This glorious sight, when sleep hath shut all eyes?
To whom our general ancestor replied.
Daughter of God and Man, accomplished Eve,
These have their course to finish round the earth,
By morrow evening, and from land to land
In order, though to nations yet unborn,
Ministring light prepared, they set and rise;
Lest total Darkness should by night regain
Her old possession, and extinguish life
In Nature and all things; which these soft fires
Not only enlighten, but with kindly heat
Of various influence foment and warm,
Temper or nourish, or in part shed down
Their stellar virtue on all kinds that grow
On earth, made hereby apter to receive
Perfection from the sun’s more potent ray.
These then, though unbeheld in deep of night,
Shine not in vain; nor think, though men were none,
That Heaven would want spectators, God want praise:
Millions of spiritual creatures walk the earth
Unseen, both when we wake, and when we sleep:
All these with ceaseless praise his works behold
Both day and night: How often from the steep
Of echoing hill or thicket have we heard
Celestial voices to the midnight air,
Sole, or responsive each to others note,
Singing their great Creator? oft in bands
While they keep watch, or nightly rounding walk,
With heavenly touch of instrumental sounds
In full harmonick number joined, their songs
Divide the night, and lift our thoughts to Heaven.
Thus talking, hand in hand alone they passed
On to their blissful bower: it was a place
Chosen by the sovran Planter, when he framed
All things to Man’s delightful use; the roof
Of thickest covert was inwoven shade
Laurel and myrtle, and what higher grew
Of firm and fragrant leaf; on either side
Acanthus, and each odorous bushy shrub,
Fenced up the verdant wall; each beauteous flower,
Iris all hues, roses, and jessamin,
Reared high their flourished heads between, and wrought
Mosaick; underfoot the violet,
Crocus, and hyacinth, with rich inlay
Broidered the ground, more coloured than with stone
Of costliest emblem: Other creature here,
Bird, beast, insect, or worm, durst enter none,
Such was their awe of Man. In shadier bower
More sacred and sequestered, though but feigned,
Pan or Sylvanus never slept, nor Nymph
Nor Faunus haunted. Here, in close recess,
With flowers, garlands, and sweet-smelling herbs,
Espoused Eve decked first her nuptial bed;
And heavenly quires the hymenaean sung,
What day the genial Angel to our sire
Brought her in naked beauty more adorned,
More lovely, than Pandora, whom the Gods
Endowed with all their gifts, and O! too like
In sad event, when to the unwiser son
Of Japhet brought by Hermes, she ensnared
Mankind with her fair looks, to be avenged
On him who had stole Jove’s authentick fire.
Thus, at their shady lodge arrived, both stood,
Both turned, and under open sky adored
The God that made both sky, air, earth, and heaven,
Which they beheld, the moon’s resplendent globe,
And starry pole: Thou also madest the night,
Maker Omnipotent, and thou the day,
Which we, in our appointed work employed,
Have finished, happy in our mutual help
And mutual love, the crown of all our bliss
Ordained by thee; and this delicious place
For us too large, where thy abundance wants
Partakers, and uncropt falls to the ground.
But thou hast promised from us two a race
To fill the earth, who shall with us extol
Thy goodness infinite, both when we wake,
And when we seek, as now, thy gift of sleep.
This said unanimous, and other rites
Observing none, but adoration pure
Which God likes best, into their inmost bower
Handed they went; and, eased the putting off
These troublesome disguises which we wear,
Straight side by side were laid; nor turned, I ween,
Adam from his fair spouse, nor Eve the rites
Mysterious of connubial love refused:
Whatever hypocrites austerely talk
Of purity, and place, and innocence,
Defaming as impure what God declares
Pure, and commands to some, leaves free to all.
Our Maker bids encrease; who bids abstain
But our Destroyer, foe to God and Man?
Hail, wedded Love, mysterious law, true source
Of human offspring, sole propriety
In Paradise of all things common else!
By thee adulterous Lust was driven from men
Among the bestial herds to range; by thee
Founded in reason, loyal, just, and pure,
Relations dear, and all the charities
Of father, son, and brother, first were known.
Far be it, that I should write thee sin or blame,
Or think thee unbefitting holiest place,
Perpetual fountain of domestick sweets,
Whose bed is undefiled and chaste pronounced,
Present, or past, as saints and patriarchs used.
Here Love his golden shafts employs, here lights
His constant lamp, and waves his purple wings,
Reigns here and revels; not in the bought smile
Of harlots, loveless, joyless, unendeared,
Casual fruition; nor in court-amours,
Mixed dance, or wanton mask, or midnight ball,
Or serenate, which the starved lover sings
To his proud fair, best quitted with disdain.
These, lulled by nightingales, embracing slept,
And on their naked limbs the flowery roof
Showered roses, which the morn repaired. Sleep on,
Blest pair; and O! yet happiest, if ye seek
No happier state, and know to know no more.
Now had night measured with her shadowy cone
Half way up hill this vast sublunar vault,
And from their ivory port the Cherubim,
Forth issuing at the accustomed hour, stood armed
To their night watches in warlike parade;
When Gabriel to his next in power thus spake.
Uzziel, half these draw off, and coast the south
With strictest watch; these other wheel the north;
Our circuit meets full west. As flame they part,
Half wheeling to the shield, half to the spear.
From these, two strong and subtle Spirits he called
That near him stood, and gave them thus in charge.
Ithuriel and Zephon, with winged speed
Search through this garden, leave unsearched no nook;
But chiefly where those two fair creatures lodge,
Now laid perhaps asleep, secure of harm.
This evening from the sun’s decline arrived,
Who tells of some infernal Spirit seen
Hitherward bent (who could have thought?) escaped
The bars of Hell, on errand bad no doubt:
Such, where ye find, seise fast, and hither bring.
So saying, on he led his radiant files,
Dazzling the moon; these to the bower direct
In search of whom they sought: Him there they found
Squat like a toad, close at the ear of Eve,
Assaying by his devilish art to reach
The organs of her fancy, and with them forge
Illusions, as he list, phantasms and dreams;
Or if, inspiring venom, he might taint
The animal spirits, that from pure blood arise
Like gentle breaths from rivers pure, thence raise
At least distempered, discontented thoughts,
Vain hopes, vain aims, inordinate desires,
Blown up with high conceits ingendering pride.
Him thus intent Ithuriel with his spear
Touched lightly; for no falshood can endure
Touch of celestial temper, but returns
Of force to its own likeness: Up he starts
Discovered and surprised. As when a spark
Lights on a heap of nitrous powder, laid
Fit for the tun some magazine to store
Against a rumoured war, the smutty grain,
With sudden blaze diffused, inflames the air;
So started up in his own shape the Fiend.
Back stept those two fair Angels, half amazed
So sudden to behold the grisly king;
Yet thus, unmoved with fear, accost him soon.
Which of those rebel Spirits adjudged to Hell
Comest thou, escaped thy prison? and, transformed,
Why sat’st thou like an enemy in wait,
Here watching at the head of these that sleep?
Know ye not then said Satan, filled with scorn,
Know ye not me? ye knew me once no mate
For you, there sitting where ye durst not soar:
Not to know me argues yourselves unknown,
The lowest of your throng; or, if ye know,
Why ask ye, and superfluous begin
Your message, like to end as much in vain?
To whom thus Zephon, answering scorn with scorn.
Think not, revolted Spirit, thy shape the same,
Or undiminished brightness to be known,
As when thou stoodest in Heaven upright and pure;
That glory then, when thou no more wast good,
Departed from thee; and thou resemblest now
Thy sin and place of doom obscure and foul.
But come, for thou, be sure, shalt give account
To him who sent us, whose charge is to keep
This place inviolable, and these from harm.
So spake the Cherub; and his grave rebuke,
Severe in youthful beauty, added grace
Invincible: Abashed the Devil stood,
And felt how awful goodness is, and saw
Virtue in her shape how lovely; saw, and pined
His loss; but chiefly to find here observed
His lustre visibly impaired; yet seemed
Undaunted. If I must contend, said he,
Best with the best, the sender, not the sent,
Or all at once; more glory will be won,
Or less be lost. Thy fear, said Zephon bold,
Will save us trial what the least can do
Single against thee wicked, and thence weak.
The Fiend replied not, overcome with rage;
But, like a proud steed reined, went haughty on,
Champing his iron curb: To strive or fly
He held it vain; awe from above had quelled
His heart, not else dismayed. Now drew they nigh
The western point, where those half-rounding guards
Just met, and closing stood in squadron joined,
A waiting next command. To whom their Chief,
Gabriel, from the front thus called aloud.
O friends! I hear the tread of nimble feet
Hasting this way, and now by glimpse discern
Ithuriel and Zephon through the shade;
And with them comes a third of regal port,
But faded splendour wan; who by his gait
And fierce demeanour seems the Prince of Hell,
Not likely to part hence without contest;
Stand firm, for in his look defiance lours.
He scarce had ended, when those two approached,
And brief related whom they brought, where found,
How busied, in what form and posture couched.
To whom with stern regard thus Gabriel spake.
Why hast thou, Satan, broke the bounds prescribed
To thy transgressions, and disturbed the charge
Of others, who approve not to transgress
By thy example, but have power and right
To question thy bold entrance on this place;
Employed, it seems, to violate sleep, and those
Whose dwelling God hath planted here in bliss!
To whom thus Satan with contemptuous brow.
Gabriel? thou hadst in Heaven the esteem of wise,
And such I held thee; but this question asked
Puts me in doubt. Lives there who loves his pain!
Who would not, finding way, break loose from Hell,
Though thither doomed! Thou wouldst thyself, no doubt
And boldly venture to whatever place
Farthest from pain, where thou mightst hope to change
Torment with ease, and soonest recompense
Dole with delight, which in this place I sought;
To thee no reason, who knowest only good,
But evil hast not tried: and wilt object
His will who bounds us! Let him surer bar
His iron gates, if he intends our stay
In that dark durance: Thus much what was asked.
The rest is true, they found me where they say;
But that implies not violence or harm.
Thus he in scorn. The warlike Angel moved,
Disdainfully half smiling, thus replied.
O loss of one in Heaven to judge of wise
Since Satan fell, whom folly overthrew,
And now returns him from his prison ’scaped,
Gravely in doubt whether to hold them wise
Or not, who ask what boldness brought him hither
Unlicensed from his bounds in Hell prescribed;
So wise he judges it to fly from pain
However, and to ’scape his punishment!
So judge thou still, presumptuous! till the wrath,
Which thou incurrest by flying, meet thy flight
Sevenfold, and scourge that wisdom back to Hell,
Which taught thee yet no better, that no pain
Can equal anger infinite provoked.
But wherefore thou alone? wherefore with thee
Came not all hell broke loose? or thou than they
Less hardy to endure? Courageous Chief!
The first in flight from pain! hadst thou alleged
To thy deserted host this cause of flight,
Thou surely hadst not come sole fugitive.
To which the Fiend thus answered, frowning stern.
Not that I less endure, or shrink from pain,
Insulting Angel! well thou knowest I stood
Thy fiercest, when in battle to thy aid
The blasting vollied thunder made all speed,
And seconded thy else not dreaded spear.
But still thy words at random, as before,
Argue thy inexperience what behoves
From hard assays and ill successes past
A faithful leader, not to hazard all
Through ways of danger by himself untried:
I, therefore, I alone first undertook
To wing the desolate abyss, and spy
This new created world, whereof in Hell
Fame is not silent, here in hope to find
Better abode, and my afflicted Powers
To settle here on earth, or in mid air;
Though for possession put to try once more
What thou and thy gay legions dare against;
Whose easier business were to serve their Lord
High up in Heaven, with songs to hymn his throne,
And practised distances to cringe, not fight,
To whom the warriour Angel soon replied.
To say and straight unsay, pretending first
Wise to fly pain, professing next the spy,
Argues no leader but a liar traced,
Satan, and couldst thou faithful add? O name,
O sacred name of faithfulness profaned!
Faithful to whom? to thy rebellious crew?
Army of Fiends, fit body to fit head.
Was this your discipline and faith engaged,
Your military obedience, to dissolve
Allegiance to the acknowledged Power supreme?
And thou, sly hypocrite, who now wouldst seem
Patron of liberty, who more than thou
Once fawned, and cringed, and servilely adored
Heaven’s awful Monarch? wherefore, but in hope
To dispossess him, and thyself to reign?
But mark what I arreed thee now, Avant;
Fly neither whence thou fledst! If from this hour
Within these hallowed limits thou appear,
Back to the infernal pit I drag thee chained,
And seal thee so, as henceforth not to scorn
The facile gates of Hell too slightly barred.
So threatened he; but Satan to no threats
Gave heed, but waxing more in rage replied.
Then when I am thy captive talk of chains,
Proud limitary Cherub! but ere then
Far heavier load thyself expect to feel
From my prevailing arm, though Heaven’s King
Ride on thy wings, and thou with thy compeers,
Us’d to the yoke, drawest his triumphant wheels
In progress through the road of Heaven star-paved.
While thus he spake, the angelick squadron bright
Turned fiery red, sharpening in mooned horns
Their phalanx, and began to hem him round
With ported spears, as thick as when a field
Of Ceres ripe for harvest waving bends
Her bearded grove of ears, which way the wind
Sways them; the careful plowman doubting stands,
Left on the threshing floor his hopeless sheaves
Prove chaff. On the other side, Satan, alarmed,
Collecting all his might, dilated stood,
Like Teneriff or Atlas, unremoved:
His stature reached the sky, and on his crest
Sat Horrour plumed; nor wanted in his grasp
What seemed both spear and shield: Now dreadful deeds
Might have ensued, nor only Paradise
In this commotion, but the starry cope
Of Heaven perhaps, or all the elements
At least had gone to wrack, disturbed and torn
With violence of this conflict, had not soon
The Eternal, to prevent such horrid fray,
Hung forth in Heaven his golden scales, yet seen
Betwixt Astrea and the Scorpion sign,
Wherein all things created first he weighed,
The pendulous round earth with balanced air
In counterpoise, now ponders all events,
Battles and realms: In these he put two weights,
The sequel each of parting and of fight:
The latter quick up flew, and kicked the beam,
Which Gabriel spying, thus bespake the Fiend.
Satan, I know thy strength, and thou knowest mine;
Neither our own, but given: What folly then
To boast what arms can do? since thine no more
Than Heaven permits, nor mine, though doubled now
To trample thee as mire: For proof look up,
And read thy lot in yon celestial sign;
Where thou art weighed, and shown how light, how weak,
If thou resist. The Fiend looked up, and knew
His mounted scale aloft: Nor more; but fled
Murmuring, and with him fled the shades of night.







Now Morn, her rosy steps in the eastern clime
Advancing, sowed the earth with orient pearl,
When Adam waked, so customed; for his sleep
Was aery-light, from pure digestion bred,
And temperate vapours bland, which the only sound
Of leaves and fuming rills, Aurora’s fan,
Lightly dispersed, and the shrill matin song
Of birds on every bough; so much the more
His wonder was to find unwakened Eve
With tresses discomposed, and glowing cheek,
As through unquiet rest: He, on his side
Leaning half raised, with looks of cordial love
Hung over her enamoured, and beheld
Beauty, which, whether waking or asleep,
Shot forth peculiar graces; then with voice
Mild, as when Zephyrus on Flora breathes,
Her hand soft touching, whispered thus. Awake,
My fairest, my espoused, my latest found,
Heaven’s last best gift, my ever new delight!
Awake: The morning shines, and the fresh field
Calls us; we lose the prime, to mark how spring
Our tender plants, how blows the citron grove,
What drops the myrrh, and what the balmy reed,
How nature paints her colours, how the bee
Sits on the bloom extracting liquid sweet.
Such whispering waked her, but with startled eye
On Adam, whom embracing, thus she spake.
O sole in whom my thoughts find all repose,
My glory, my perfection! glad I see
Thy face, and morn returned; for I this night
(Such night till this I never passed) have dreamed,
If dreamed, not, as I oft am wont, of thee,
Works of day past, or morrow’s next design,
But of offence and trouble, which my mind
Knew never till this irksome night: Methought,
Close at mine ear one called me forth to walk
With gentle voice; I thought it thine: It said,
“Why sleepest thou, Eve? now is the pleasant time,
The cool, the silent, save where silence yields
To the night-warbling bird, that now awake
Tunes sweetest his love-laboured song; now reigns
Full-orbed the moon, and with more pleasing light
Shadowy sets off the face of things; in vain,
If none regard; Heaven wakes with all his eyes,
Whom to behold but thee, Nature’s desire?
In whose sight all things joy, with ravishment
Attracted by thy beauty still to gaze.”
I rose as at thy call, but found thee not;
To find thee I directed then my walk;
And on, methought, alone I passed through ways
That brought me on a sudden to the tree
Of interdicted knowledge: fair it seemed,
Much fairer to my fancy than by day:
And, as I wondering looked, beside it stood
One shaped and winged like one of those from Heaven
By us oft seen; his dewy locks distilled
Ambrosia; on that tree he also gazed;
And “O fair plant,” said he, “with fruit surcharged,
Deigns none to ease thy load, and taste thy sweet,
Nor God, nor Man? Is knowledge so despised?
Or envy, or what reserve forbids to taste?
Forbid who will, none shall from me withhold
Longer thy offered good; why else set here?”
This said, he paused not, but with venturous arm
He plucked, he tasted; me damp horrour chilled
At such bold words vouched with a deed so bold:
But he thus, overjoyed; “O fruit divine,
Sweet of thyself, but much more sweet thus cropt,
Forbidden here, it seems, as only fit
For Gods, yet able to make Gods of Men:
And why not Gods of Men; since good, the more
Communicated, more abundant grows,
The author not impaired, but honoured more?
Here, happy creature, fair angelick Eve!
Partake thou also; happy though thou art,
Happier thou mayest be, worthier canst not be:
Taste this, and be henceforth among the Gods
Thyself a Goddess, not to earth confined,
But sometimes in the air, as we, sometimes
Ascend to Heaven, by merit thine, and see
What life the Gods live there, and such live thou!”
So saying, he drew nigh, and to me held,
Even to my mouth of that same fruit held part
Which he had plucked; the pleasant savoury smell
So quickened appetite, that I, methought,
Could not but taste. Forthwith up to the clouds
With him I flew, and underneath beheld
The earth outstretched immense, a prospect wide
And various: Wondering at my flight and change
To this high exaltation; suddenly
My guide was gone, and I, methought, sunk down,
And fell asleep; but O, how glad I waked
To find this but a dream! Thus Eve her night
Related, and thus Adam answered sad.
Best image of myself, and dearer half,
The trouble of thy thoughts this night in sleep
Affects me equally; nor can I like
This uncouth dream, of evil sprung, I fear;
Yet evil whence? in thee can harbour none,
Created pure. But know that in the soul
Are many lesser faculties, that serve
Reason as chief; among these Fancy next
Her office holds; of all external things
Which the five watchful senses represent,
She forms imaginations, aery shapes,
Which Reason, joining or disjoining, frames
All what we affirm or what deny, and call
Our knowledge or opinion; then retires
Into her private cell, when nature rests.
Oft in her absence mimick Fancy wakes
To imitate her; but, misjoining shapes,
Wild work produces oft, and most in dreams;
Ill matching words and deeds long past or late.
Some such resemblances, methinks, I find
Of our last evening’s talk, in this thy dream,
But with addition strange; yet be not sad.
Evil into the mind of God or Man
May come and go, so unreproved, and leave
No spot or blame behind: Which gives me hope
That what in sleep thou didst abhor to dream,
Waking thou never will consent to do.
Be not disheartened then, nor cloud those looks,
That wont to be more cheerful and serene,
Than when fair morning first smiles on the world;
And let us to our fresh employments rise
Among the groves, the fountains, and the flowers
That open now their choisest bosomed smells,
Reserved from night, and kept for thee in store.
So cheered he his fair spouse, and she was cheered;
But silently a gentle tear let fall
From either eye, and wiped them with her hair;
Two other precious drops that ready stood,
Each in their crystal sluice, he ere they fell
Kissed, as the gracious signs of sweet remorse
And pious awe, that feared to have offended.
So all was cleared, and to the field they haste.
But first, from under shady arborous roof
Soon as they forth were come to open sight
Of day-spring, and the sun, who, scarce up-risen,
With wheels yet hovering o’er the ocean-brim,
Shot parallel to the earth his dewy ray,
Discovering in wide landskip all the east
Of Paradise and Eden’s happy plains,
Lowly they bowed adoring, and began
Their orisons, each morning duly paid
In various style; for neither various style
Nor holy rapture wanted they to praise
Their Maker, in fit strains pronounced, or sung
Unmeditated; such prompt eloquence
Flowed from their lips, in prose or numerous verse,
More tuneable than needed lute or harp
To add more sweetness; and they thus began.
These are thy glorious works, Parent of good,
Almighty! Thine this universal frame,
Thus wonderous fair; Thyself how wonderous then!
Unspeakable, who sitst above these heavens
To us invisible, or dimly seen
In these thy lowest works; yet these declare
Thy goodness beyond thought, and power divine.
Speak, ye who best can tell, ye sons of light,
Angels; for ye behold him, and with songs
And choral symphonies, day without night,
Circle his throne rejoicing; ye in Heaven
On Earth join all ye Creatures to extol
Him first, him last, him midst, and without end.
Fairest of stars, last in the train of night,
If better thou belong not to the dawn,
Sure pledge of day, that crownest the smiling morn
With thy bright circlet, praise him in thy sphere,
While day arises, that sweet hour of prime.
Thou Sun, of this great world both eye and soul,
Acknowledge him thy greater; sound his praise
In thy eternal course, both when thou climbest,
And when high noon hast gained, and when thou fallest.
Moon, that now meetest the orient sun, now flyest,
With the fixed Stars, fixed in their orb that flies;
And ye five other wandering Fires, that move
In mystick dance not without song, resound
His praise, who out of darkness called up light.
Air, and ye Elements, the eldest birth
Of Nature’s womb, that in quaternion run
Perpetual circle, multiform; and mix
And nourish all things; let your ceaseless change
Vary to our great Maker still new praise.
Ye Mists and Exhalations, that now rise
From hill or steaming lake, dusky or gray,
Till the sun paint your fleecy skirts with gold,
In honour to the world’s great Author rise;
Whether to deck with clouds the uncoloured sky,
Or wet the thirsty earth with falling showers,
Rising or falling still advance his praise.
His praise, ye Winds, that from four quarters blow,
Breathe soft or loud; and, wave your tops, ye Pines,
With every plant, in sign of worship wave.
Fountains, and ye that warble, as ye flow,
Melodious murmurs, warbling tune his praise.
Join voices, all ye living Souls: Ye Birds,
That singing up to Heaven-gate ascend,
Bear on your wings and in your notes his praise.
Ye that in waters glide, and ye that walk
The earth, and stately tread, or lowly creep;
Witness if I be silent, morn or even,
To hill, or valley, fountain, or fresh shade,
Made vocal by my song, and taught his praise.
Hail, universal Lord, be bounteous still
To give us only good; and if the night
Have gathered aught of evil, or concealed,
Disperse it, as now light dispels the dark!
So prayed they innocent, and to their thoughts
Firm peace recovered soon, and wonted calm.
On to their morning’s rural work they haste,
Among sweet dews and flowers; where any row
Of fruit-trees over-woody reached too far
Their pampered boughs, and needed hands to check
Fruitless embraces: or they led the vine
To wed her elm; she, spoused, about him twines
Her marriageable arms, and with him brings
Her dower, the adopted clusters, to adorn
His barren leaves. Them thus employed beheld
With pity Heaven’s high King, and to him called
Raphael, the sociable Spirit, that deigned
To travel with Tobias, and secured
His marriage with the seventimes-wedded maid.
Raphael, said he, thou hearest what stir on Earth
Satan, from Hell ’scaped through the darksome gulf,
Hath raised in Paradise; and how disturbed
This night the human pair; how he designs
In them at once to ruin all mankind.
Go therefore, half this day as friend with friend
Converse with Adam, in what bower or shade
Thou findest him from the heat of noon retired,
To respite his day-labour with repast,
Or with repose; and such discourse bring on,
As may advise him of his happy state,
Happiness in his power left free to will,
Left to his own free will, his will though free,
Yet mutable; whence warn him to beware
He swerve not, too secure: Tell him withal
His danger, and from whom; what enemy,
Late fallen himself from Heaven, is plotting now
The fall of others from like state of bliss;
By violence? no, for that shall be withstood;
But by deceit and lies: This let him know,
Lest, wilfully transgressing, he pretend
Surprisal, unadmonished, unforewarned.
So spake the Eternal Father, and fulfilled
All justice: Nor delayed the winged Saint
After his charge received; but from among
Thousand celestial Ardours, where he stood
Veiled with his gorgeous wings, up springing light,
Flew through the midst of Heaven; the angelick quires,
On each hand parting, to his speed gave way
Through all the empyreal road; till, at the gate
Of Heaven arrived, the gate self-opened wide
On golden hinges turning, as by work
Divine the sovran Architect had framed.
From hence no cloud, or, to obstruct his sight,
Star interposed, however small he sees,
Not unconformed to other shining globes,
Earth, and the garden of God, with cedars crowned
Above all hills. As when by night the glass
Of Galileo, less assured, observes
Imagined lands and regions in the moon:
Or pilot, from amidst the Cyclades
Delos or Samos first appearing, kens
A cloudy spot. Down thither prone in flight
He speeds, and through the vast ethereal sky
Sails between worlds and worlds, with steady wing
Now on the polar winds, then with quick fan
Winnows the buxom air; till, within soar
Of towering eagles, to all the fowls he seems
A phoenix, gazed by all as that sole bird,
When, to enshrine his reliques in the Sun’s
Bright temple, to Egyptian Thebes he flies.
At once on the eastern cliff of Paradise
He lights, and to his proper shape returns
A Seraph winged: Six wings he wore, to shade
His lineaments divine; the pair that clad
Each shoulder broad, came mantling o’er his breast
With regal ornament; the middle pair
Girt like a starry zone his waist, and round
Skirted his loins and thighs with downy gold
And colours dipt in Heaven; the third his feet
Shadowed from either heel with feathered mail,
Sky-tinctured grain. Like Maia’s son he stood,
And shook his plumes, that heavenly fragrance filled
The circuit wide. Straight knew him all the bands
Of Angels under watch; and to his state,
And to his message high, in honour rise;
For on some message high they guessed him bound.
Their glittering tents he passed, and now is come
Into the blissful field, through groves of myrrh,
And flowering odours, cassia, nard, and balm;
A wilderness of sweets; for Nature here
Wantoned as in her prime, and played at will
Her virgin fancies pouring forth more sweet,
Wild above rule or art, enormous bliss.
Him through the spicy forest onward come
Adam discerned, as in the door he sat
Of his cool bower, while now the mounted sun
Shot down direct his fervid rays to warm
Earth’s inmost womb, more warmth than Adam needs:
And Eve within, due at her hour prepared
For dinner savoury fruits, of taste to please
True appetite, and not disrelish thirst
Of nectarous draughts between, from milky stream,
Berry or grape: To whom thus Adam called.
Haste hither, Eve, and worth thy sight behold
Eastward among those trees, what glorious shape
Comes this way moving; seems another morn
Risen on mid-noon; some great behest from Heaven
To us perhaps he brings, and will vouchsafe
This day to be our guest. But go with speed,
And, what thy stores contain, bring forth, and pour
Abundance, fit to honour and receive
Our heavenly stranger: Well we may afford
Our givers their own gifts, and large bestow
From large bestowed, where Nature multiplies
Her fertile growth, and by disburthening grows
More fruitful, which instructs us not to spare.
To whom thus Eve. Adam, earth’s hallowed mould,
Of God inspired! small store will serve, where store,
All seasons, ripe for use hangs on the stalk;
Save what by frugal storing firmness gains
To nourish, and superfluous moist consumes:
But I will haste, and from each bough and brake,
Each plant and juciest gourd, will pluck such choice
To entertain our Angel-guest, as he
Beholding shall confess, that here on Earth
God hath dispensed his bounties as in Heaven.
So saying, with dispatchful looks in haste
She turns, on hospitable thoughts intent
What choice to choose for delicacy best,
What order, so contrived as not to mix
Tastes, not well joined, inelegant, but bring
Taste after taste upheld with kindliest change;
Bestirs her then, and from each tender stalk
Whatever Earth, all-bearing mother, yields
In India East or West, or middle shore
In Pontus or the Punick coast, or where
Alcinous reigned, fruit of all kinds, in coat
Rough, or smooth rind, or bearded husk, or shell,
She gathers, tribute large, and on the board
Heaps with unsparing hand; for drink the grape
She crushes, inoffensive must, and meaths
From many a berry, and from sweet kernels pressed
She tempers dulcet creams; nor these to hold
Wants her fit vessels pure; then strows the ground
With rose and odours from the shrub unfumed.
Mean while our primitive great sire, to meet
His God-like guest, walks forth, without more train
Accompanied than with his own complete
Perfections; in himself was all his state,
More solemn than the tedious pomp that waits
On princes, when their rich retinue long
Of horses led, and grooms besmeared with gold,
Dazzles the croud, and sets them all agape.
Nearer his presence Adam, though not awed,
Yet with submiss approach and reverence meek,
As to a superiour nature bowing low,
Thus said. Native of Heaven, for other place
None can than Heaven such glorious shape contain;
Since, by descending from the thrones above,
Those happy places thou hast deigned a while
To want, and honour these, vouchsafe with us
Two only, who yet by sovran gift possess
This spacious ground, in yonder shady bower
To rest; and what the garden choicest bears
To sit and taste, till this meridian heat
Be over, and the sun more cool decline.
Whom thus the angelick Virtue answered mild.
Adam, I therefore came; nor art thou such
Created, or such place hast here to dwell,
As may not oft invite, though Spirits of Heaven,
To visit thee; lead on then where thy bower
O’ershades; for these mid-hours, till evening rise,
I have at will. So to the sylvan lodge
They came, that like Pomona’s arbour smiled,
With flowerets decked, and fragrant smells; but Eve,
Undecked save with herself, more lovely fair
Than Wood-Nymph, or the fairest Goddess feigned
Of three that in mount Ida naked strove,
Stood to entertain her guest from Heaven; no veil
She needed, virtue-proof; no thought infirm
Altered her cheek. On whom the Angel Hail
Bestowed, the holy salutation used
Long after to blest Mary, second Eve.
Hail, Mother of Mankind, whose fruitful womb
Shall fill the world more numerous with thy sons,
Than with these various fruits the trees of God
Have heaped this table!—Raised of grassy turf
Their table was, and mossy seats had round,
And on her ample square from side to side
All autumn piled, though spring and autumn here
Danced hand in hand. A while discourse they hold;
No fear lest dinner cool; when thus began
Our author. Heavenly stranger, please to taste
These bounties, which our Nourisher, from whom
All perfect good, unmeasured out, descends,
To us for food and for delight hath caused
The earth to yield; unsavoury food perhaps
To spiritual natures; only this I know,
That one celestial Father gives to all.
To whom the Angel. Therefore what he gives
(Whose praise be ever sung) to Man in part
Spiritual, may of purest Spirits be found
No ingrateful food: And food alike those pure
Intelligential substances require,
As doth your rational; and both contain
Within them every lower faculty
Of sense, whereby they hear, see, smell, touch, taste,
Tasting concoct, digest, assimilate,
And corporeal to incorporeal turn.
For know, whatever was created, needs
To be sustained and fed: Of elements
The grosser feeds the purer, earth the sea,
Earth and the sea feed air, the air those fires
Ethereal, and as lowest first the moon;
Whence in her visage round those spots, unpurged
Vapours not yet into her substance turned.
Nor doth the moon no nourishment exhale
From her moist continent to higher orbs.
The sun that light imparts to all, receives
From all his alimental recompence
In humid exhalations, and at even
Sups with the ocean. Though in Heaven the trees
Of life ambrosial fruitage bear, and vines
Yield nectar; though from off the boughs each morn
We brush mellifluous dews, and find the ground
Covered with pearly grain: Yet God hath here
Varied his bounty so with new delights,
As may compare with Heaven; and to taste
Think not I shall be nice. So down they sat,
And to their viands fell; nor seemingly
The Angel, nor in mist, the common gloss
Of Theologians; but with keen dispatch
Of real hunger, and concoctive heat
To transubstantiate: What redounds, transpires
Through Spirits with ease; nor wonder; if by fire
Of sooty coal the empirick alchemist
Can turn, or holds it possible to turn,
Metals of drossiest ore to perfect gold,
As from the mine. Mean while at table Eve
Ministered naked, and their flowing cups
With pleasant liquours crowned: O innocence
Deserving Paradise! if ever, then,
Then had the sons of God excuse to have been
Enamoured at that sight; but in those hearts
Love unlibidinous reigned, nor jealousy
Was understood, the injured lover’s hell.
Thus when with meats and drinks they had sufficed,
Not burdened nature, sudden mind arose
In Adam, not to let the occasion pass
Given him by this great conference to know
Of things above his world, and of their being
Who dwell in Heaven, whose excellence he saw
Transcend his own so far; whose radiant forms,
Divine effulgence, whose high power, so far
Exceeded human; and his wary speech
Thus to the empyreal minister he framed.
Inhabitant with God, now know I well
Thy favour, in this honour done to Man;
Under whose lowly roof thou hast vouchsafed
To enter, and these earthly fruits to taste,
Food not of Angels, yet accepted so,
As that more willingly thou couldst not seem
At Heaven’s high feasts to have fed: yet what compare
To whom the winged Hierarch replied.
O Adam, One Almighty is, from whom
All things proceed, and up to him return,
If not depraved from good, created all
Such to perfection, one first matter all,
Endued with various forms, various degrees
Of substance, and, in things that live, of life;
But more refined, more spiritous, and pure,
As nearer to him placed, or nearer tending
Each in their several active spheres assigned,
Till body up to spirit work, in bounds
Proportioned to each kind. So from the root
Springs lighter the green stalk, from thence the leaves
More aery, last the bright consummate flower
Spirits odorous breathes: flowers and their fruit,
Man’s nourishment, by gradual scale sublimed,
To vital spirits aspire, to animal,
To intellectual; give both life and sense,
Fancy and understanding; whence the soul
Reason receives, and reason is her being,
Discursive, or intuitive; discourse
Is oftest yours, the latter most is ours,
Differing but in degree, of kind the same.
Wonder not then, what God for you saw good
If I refuse not, but convert, as you
To proper substance. Time may come, when Men
With Angels may participate, and find
No inconvenient diet, nor too light fare;
And from these corporal nutriments perhaps
Your bodies may at last turn all to spirit,
Improved by tract of time, and, winged, ascend
Ethereal, as we; or may, at choice,
Here or in heavenly Paradises dwell;
If ye be found obedient, and retain
Unalterably firm his love entire,
Whose progeny you are. Mean while enjoy
Your fill what happiness this happy state
Can comprehend, incapable of more.
To whom the patriarch of mankind replied.
O favourable Spirit, propitious guest,
Well hast thou taught the way that might direct
Our knowledge, and the scale of nature set
From center to circumference; whereon,
In contemplation of created things,
By steps we may ascend to God. But say,
What meant that caution joined, If ye be found
Obedient? Can we want obedience then
To him, or possibly his love desert,
Who formed us from the dust and placed us here
Full to the utmost measure of what bliss
Human desires can seek or apprehend?
To whom the Angel. Son of Heaven and Earth,
Attend! That thou art happy, owe to God;
That thou continuest such, owe to thyself,
That is, to thy obedience; therein stand.
This was that caution given thee; be advised.
God made thee perfect, not immutable;
And good he made thee, but to persevere
He left it in thy power; ordained thy will
By nature free, not over-ruled by fate
Inextricable, or strict necessity:
Our voluntary service he requires,
Not our necessitated; such with him
Finds no acceptance, nor can find; for how
Can hearts, not free, be tried whether they serve
Willing or no, who will but what they must
By destiny, and can no other choose?
Myself, and all the angelick host, that stand
In sight of God, enthroned, our happy state
Hold, as you yours, while our obedience holds;
On other surety none: Freely we serve,
Because we freely love, as in our will
To love or not; in this we stand or fall:
And some are fallen, to disobedience fallen,
And so from Heaven to deepest Hell; O fall
From what high state of bliss, into what woe!
To whom our great progenitor. Thy words
Attentive, and with more delighted ear,
Divine instructer, I have heard, than when
Cherubick songs by night from neighbouring hills
Aereal musick send: Nor knew I not
To be both will and deed created free;
Yet that we never shall forget to love
Our Maker, and obey him whose command
Single is yet so just, my constant thoughts
Assured me, and still assure: Though what thou tellest
Hath passed in Heaven, some doubt within me move,
But more desire to hear, if thou consent,
The full relation, which must needs be strange,
Worthy of sacred silence to be heard;
And we have yet large day, for scarce the sun
Hath finished half his journey, and scarce begins
His other half in the great zone of Heaven.
Thus Adam made request; and Raphael,
After short pause assenting, thus began.
High matter thou enjoinest me, O prime of men,
Sad task and hard: For how shall I relate
To human sense the invisible exploits
Of warring Spirits? how, without remorse,
The ruin of so many glorious once
And perfect while they stood? how last unfold
The secrets of another world, perhaps
Not lawful to reveal? yet for thy good
This is dispensed; and what surmounts the reach
Of human sense, I shall delineate so,
By likening spiritual to corporal forms,
As may express them best; though what if Earth
Be but a shadow of Heaven, and things therein
Each to other like, more than on earth is thought?
As yet this world was not, and Chaos wild
Reigned where these Heavens now roll, where Earth now rests
Upon her center poised; when on a day
(For time, though in eternity, applied
To motion, measures all things durable
By present, past, and future,) on such day
As Heaven’s great year brings forth, the empyreal host
Of Angels by imperial summons called,
Innumerable before the Almighty’s throne
Forthwith, from all the ends of Heaven, appeared
Under their Hierarchs in orders bright:
Ten thousand thousand ensigns high advanced,
Standards and gonfalons ’twixt van and rear
Stream in the air, and for distinction serve
Of hierarchies, of orders, and degrees;
Or in their glittering tissues bear imblazed
Holy memorials, acts of zeal and love
Recorded eminent. Thus when in orbs
Of circuit inexpressible they stood,
Orb within orb, the Father Infinite,
By whom in bliss imbosomed sat the Son,
Amidst as from a flaming mount, whose top
Brightness had made invisible, thus spake.
Hear, all ye Angels, progeny of light,
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers;
Hear my decree, which unrevoked shall stand.
This day I have begot whom I declare
My only Son, and on this holy hill
Him have anointed, whom ye now behold
At my right hand; your head I him appoint;
And by myself have sworn, to him shall bow
All knees in Heaven, and shall confess him Lord:
Under his great vice-gerent reign abide
United, as one individual soul,
For ever happy: Him who disobeys,
Me disobeys, breaks union, and that day,
Cast out from God and blessed vision, falls
Into utter darkness, deep ingulfed, his place
Ordained without redemption, without end.
So spake the Omnipotent, and with his words
All seemed well pleased; all seemed, but were not all.
That day, as other solemn days, they spent
In song and dance about the sacred hill;
Mystical dance, which yonder starry sphere
Of planets, and of fixed, in all her wheels
Resembles nearest, mazes intricate,
Eccentrick, intervolved, yet regular
Then most, when most irregular they seem;
And in their motions harmony divine
So smooths her charming tones, that God’s own ear
Listens delighted. Evening now approached,
(For we have also our evening and our morn,
We ours for change delectable, not need;)
Forthwith from dance to sweet repast they turn
Desirous; all in circles as they stood,
Tables are set, and on a sudden piled
With Angels food, and rubied nectar flows
In pearl, in diamond, and massy gold,
Fruit of delicious vines, the growth of Heaven.
On flowers reposed, and with fresh flowerets crowned,
They eat, they drink, and in communion sweet
Quaff immortality and joy, secure
Of surfeit, where full measure only bounds
Excess, before the all-bounteous King, who showered
With copious hand, rejoicing in their joy.
Now when ambrosial night with clouds exhaled
From that high mount of God, whence light and shade
Spring both, the face of brightest Heaven had changed
To grateful twilight, (for night comes not there
In darker veil) and roseate dews disposed
All but the unsleeping eyes of God to rest;
Wide over all the plain, and wider far
Than all this globous earth in plain outspread,
(Such are the courts of God) the angelick throng,
Dispersed in bands and files, their camp extend
By living streams among the trees of life,
Pavilions numberless, and sudden reared,
Celestial tabernacles, where they slept
Fanned with cool winds; save those, who, in their course,
Melodious hymns about the sovran throne
Alternate all night long: but not so waked
Satan; so call him now, his former name
Is heard no more in Heaven; he of the first,
If not the first Arch-Angel, great in power,
In favour and pre-eminence, yet fraught
With envy against the Son of God, that day
Honoured by his great Father, and proclaimed
Messiah King anointed, could not bear
Through pride that sight, and thought himself impaired.
Deep malice thence conceiving and disdain,
Soon as midnight brought on the dusky hour
Friendliest to sleep and silence, he resolved
With all his legions to dislodge, and leave
Unworshipt, unobeyed, the throne supreme,
Contemptuous; and his next subordinate
Awakening, thus to him in secret spake.
Sleepest thou, Companion dear? What sleep can close
Thy eye-lids? and rememberest what decree
Of yesterday, so late hath passed the lips
Of Heaven’s Almighty. Thou to me thy thoughts
Wast wont, I mine to thee was wont to impart;
Both waking we were one; how then can now
Thy sleep dissent? New laws thou seest imposed;
New laws from him who reigns, new minds may raise
In us who serve, new counsels to debate
What doubtful may ensue: More in this place
To utter is not safe. Assemble thou
Of all those myriads which we lead the chief;
Tell them, that by command, ere yet dim night
Her shadowy cloud withdraws, I am to haste,
And all who under me their banners wave,
Homeward, with flying march, where we possess
The quarters of the north; there to prepare
Fit entertainment to receive our King,
The great Messiah, and his new commands,
Who speedily through all the hierarchies
Intends to pass triumphant, and give laws.
So spake the false Arch-Angel, and infused
Bad influence into the unwary breast
Of his associate: He together calls,
Or several one by one, the regent Powers,
Under him Regent; tells, as he was taught,
That the Most High commanding, now ere night,
Now ere dim night had disincumbered Heaven,
The great hierarchal standard was to move;
Tells the suggested cause, and casts between
Ambiguous words and jealousies, to sound
Or taint integrity: But all obeyed
The wonted signal, and superiour voice
Of their great Potentate; for great indeed
His name, and high was his degree in Heaven;
His countenance, as the morning-star that guides
The starry flock, allured them, and with lies
Drew after him the third part of Heaven’s host.
Mean while the Eternal eye, whose sight discerns
Abstrusest thoughts, from forth his holy mount,
And from within the golden lamps that burn
Nightly before him, saw without their light
Rebellion rising; saw in whom, how spread
Among the sons of morn, what multitudes
Were banded to oppose his high decree;
And, smiling, to his only Son thus said.
Son, thou in whom my glory I behold
In full resplendence, Heir of all my might,
Nearly it now concerns us to be sure
Of our Omnipotence, and with what arms
We mean to hold what anciently we claim
Of deity or empire: Such a foe
Is rising, who intends to erect his throne
Equal to ours, throughout the spacious north;
Nor so content, hath in his thought to try
In battle, what our power is, or our right.
Let us advise, and to this hazard draw
With speed what force is left, and all employ
In our defence; lest unawares we lose
This our high place, our sanctuary, our hill.
To whom the Son with calm aspect and clear,
Lightning divine, ineffable, serene,
Made answer. Mighty Father, thou thy foes
Justly hast in derision, and, secure,
Laughest at their vain designs and tumults vain,
Matter to me of glory, whom their hate
Illustrates, when they see all regal power
Given me to quell their pride, and in event
Know whether I be dextrous to subdue
Thy rebels, or be found the worst in Heaven.
So spake the Son; but Satan, with his Powers,
Far was advanced on winged speed; an host
Innumerable as the stars of night,
Or stars of morning, dew-drops, which the sun
Impearls on every leaf and every flower.
Regions they passed, the mighty regencies
Of Seraphim, and Potentates, and Thrones,
In their triple degrees; regions to which
All thy dominion, Adam, is no more
Than what this garden is to all the earth,
And all the sea, from one entire globose
Stretched into longitude; which having passed,
At length into the limits of the north
They came; and Satan to his royal seat
High on a hill, far blazing, as a mount
Raised on a mount, with pyramids and towers
From diamond quarries hewn, and rocks of gold;
The palace of great Lucifer, (so call
That structure in the dialect of men
Interpreted,) which not long after, he
Affecting all equality with God,
In imitation of that mount whereon
Messiah was declared in sight of Heaven,
The Mountain of the Congregation called;
For thither he assembled all his train,
Pretending so commanded to consult
About the great reception of their King,
Thither to come, and with calumnious art
Of counterfeited truth thus held their ears.
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers;
If these magnifick titles yet remain
Not merely titular, since by decree
Another now hath to himself engrossed
All power, and us eclipsed under the name
Of King anointed, for whom all this haste
Of midnight-march, and hurried meeting here,
This only to consult how we may best,
With what may be devised of honours new,
Receive him coming to receive from us
Knee-tribute yet unpaid, prostration vile!
Too much to one! but double how endured,
To one, and to his image now proclaimed?
But what if better counsels might erect
Our minds, and teach us to cast off this yoke?
Will ye submit your necks, and choose to bend
The supple knee? Ye will not, if I trust
To know ye right, or if ye know yourselves
Natives and sons of Heaven possessed before
By none; and if not equal all, yet free,
Equally free; for orders and degrees
Jar not with liberty, but well consist.
Who can in reason then, or right, assume
Monarchy over such as live by right
His equals, if in power and splendour less,
In freedom equal? or can introduce
Law and edict on us, who without law
Err not? much less for this to be our Lord,
And look for adoration, to the abuse
Of those imperial titles, which assert
Our being ordained to govern, not to serve.
Thus far his bold discourse without controul
Had audience; when among the Seraphim
Abdiel, than whom none with more zeal adored
The Deity, and divine commands obeyed,
Stood up, and in a flame of zeal severe
The current of his fury thus opposed.
O argument blasphemous, false, and proud!
Words which no ear ever to hear in Heaven
Expected, least of all from thee, Ingrate,
In place thyself so high above thy peers.
Canst thou with impious obloquy condemn
The just decree of God, pronounced and sworn,
That to his only Son, by right endued
With regal scepter, every soul in Heaven
Shall bend the knee, and in that honour due
Confess him rightful King? unjust, thou sayest,
Flatly unjust, to bind with laws the free,
And equal over equals to let reign,
One over all with unsucceeded power.
Shalt thou give law to God? shalt thou dispute
With him the points of liberty, who made
Thee what thou art, and formed the Powers of Heaven
Such as he pleased, and circumscribed their being?
Yet, by experience taught, we know how good,
And of our good and of our dignity
How provident he is; how far from thought
To make us less, bent rather to exalt
Our happy state, under one head more near
United. But to grant it thee unjust,
That equal over equals monarch reign:
Thyself, though great and glorious, dost thou count,
Or all angelick nature joined in one,
Equal to him begotten Son? by whom,
As by his Word, the Mighty Father made
All things, even thee; and all the Spirits of Heaven
By him created in their bright degrees,
Crowned them with glory, and to their glory named
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers,
Essential Powers; nor by his reign obscured,
But more illustrious made; since he the head
One of our number thus reduced becomes;
His laws our laws; all honour to him done
Returns our own. Cease then this impious rage,
And tempt not these; but hasten to appease
The incensed Father, and the incensed Son,
While pardon may be found in time besought.
So spake the fervent Angel; but his zeal
None seconded, as out of season judged,
Or singular and rash: Whereat rejoiced
The Apostate, and, more haughty, thus replied.
That we were formed then sayest thou? and the work
Of secondary hands, by task transferred
From Father to his Son? strange point and new!
Doctrine which we would know whence learned: who saw
When this creation was? rememberest thou
Thy making, while the Maker gave thee being?
We know no time when we were not as now;
Know none before us, self-begot, self-raised
By our own quickening power, when fatal course
Had circled his full orb, the birth mature
Of this our native Heaven, ethereal sons.
Our puissance is our own; our own right hand
Shall teach us highest deeds, by proof to try
Who is our equal: Then thou shalt behold
Whether by supplication we intend
Address, and to begirt the almighty throne
Beseeching or besieging. This report,
These tidings carry to the anointed King;
And fly, ere evil intercept thy flight.
He said; and, as the sound of waters deep,
Hoarse murmur echoed to his words applause
Through the infinite host; nor less for that
The flaming Seraph fearless, though alone
Encompassed round with foes, thus answered bold.
O alienate from God, O Spirit accursed,
Forsaken of all good! I see thy fall
Determined, and thy hapless crew involved
In this perfidious fraud, contagion spread
Both of thy crime and punishment: Henceforth
No more be troubled how to quit the yoke
Of God’s Messiah; those indulgent laws
Will not be now vouchsafed; other decrees
Against thee are gone forth without recall;
That golden scepter, which thou didst reject,
Is now an iron rod to bruise and break
Thy disobedience. Well thou didst advise;
Yet not for thy advice or threats I fly
These wicked tents devoted, lest the wrath
Impendent, raging into sudden flame,
Distinguish not: For soon expect to feel
His thunder on thy head, devouring fire.
Then who created thee lamenting learn,
When who can uncreate thee thou shalt know.
So spake the Seraph Abdiel, faithful found
Among the faithless, faithful only he;
Among innumerable false, unmoved,
Unshaken, unseduced, unterrified,
His loyalty he kept, his love, his zeal;
Nor number, nor example, with him wrought
To swerve from truth, or change his constant mind,
Though single. From amidst them forth he passed,
Long way through hostile scorn, which he sustained
Superiour, nor of violence feared aught;
And, with retorted scorn, his back he turned
On those proud towers to swift destruction doomed.






All night the dreadless Angel, unpursued,
Through Heaven’s wide champain held his way; till Morn,
Waked by the circling Hours, with rosy hand
Unbarred the gates of light. There is a cave
Within the mount of God, fast by his throne,
Where light and darkness in perpetual round
Lodge and dislodge by turns, which makes through Heaven
Grateful vicissitude, like day and night;
Light issues forth, and at the other door
Obsequious darkness enters, till her hour
To veil the Heaven, though darkness there might well
Seem twilight here: And now went forth the Morn
Such as in highest Heaven arrayed in gold
Empyreal; from before her vanished Night,
Shot through with orient beams; when all the plain
Covered with thick embattled squadrons bright,
Chariots, and flaming arms, and fiery steeds,
Reflecting blaze on blaze, first met his view:
War he perceived, war in procinct; and found
Already known what he for news had thought
To have reported: Gladly then he mixed
Among those friendly Powers, who him received
With joy and acclamations loud, that one,
That of so many myriads fallen, yet one
Returned not lost. On to the sacred hill
They led him high applauded, and present
Before the seat supreme; from whence a voice,
From midst a golden cloud, thus mild was heard.
Servant of God. Well done; well hast thou fought
The better fight, who single hast maintained
Against revolted multitudes the cause
Of truth, in word mightier than they in arms;
And for the testimony of truth hast borne
Universal reproach, far worse to bear
Than violence; for this was all thy care
To stand approved in sight of God, though worlds
Judged thee perverse: The easier conquest now
Remains thee, aided by this host of friends,
Back on thy foes more glorious to return,
Than scorned thou didst depart; and to subdue
By force, who reason for their law refuse,
Right reason for their law, and for their King
Messiah, who by right of merit reigns.
Go, Michael, of celestial armies prince,
And thou, in military prowess next,
Gabriel, lead forth to battle these my sons
Invincible; lead forth my armed Saints,
By thousands and by millions, ranged for fight,
Equal in number to that Godless crew
Rebellious: Them with fire and hostile arms
Fearless assault; and, to the brow of Heaven
Pursuing, drive them out from God and bliss,
Into their place of punishment, the gulf
Of Tartarus, which ready opens wide
His fiery Chaos to receive their fall.
So spake the Sovran Voice, and clouds began
To darken all the hill, and smoke to roll
In dusky wreaths, reluctant flames, the sign
Of wrath awaked; nor with less dread the loud
Ethereal trumpet from on high ’gan blow:
At which command the Powers militant,
That stood for Heaven, in mighty quadrate joined
Of union irresistible, moved on
In silence their bright legions, to the sound
Of instrumental harmony, that breathed
Heroick ardour to adventurous deeds
Under their God-like leaders, in the cause
Of God and his Messiah. On they move
Indissolubly firm; nor obvious hill,
Nor straitening vale, nor wood, nor stream, divides
Their perfect ranks; for high above the ground
Their march was, and the passive air upbore
Their nimble tread; as when the total kind
Of birds, in orderly array on wing,
Came summoned over Eden to receive
Their names of thee; so over many a tract
Of Heaven they marched, and many a province wide,
Tenfold the length of this terrene: At last,
Far in the horizon to the north appeared
From skirt to skirt a fiery region, stretched
In battailous aspect, and nearer view
Bristled with upright beams innumerable
Of rigid spears, and helmets thronged, and shields
Various, with boastful argument portrayed,
The banded Powers of Satan hasting on
With furious expedition; for they weened
That self-same day, by fight or by surprise,
To win the mount of God, and on his throne
To set the Envier of his state, the proud
Aspirer; but their thoughts proved fond and vain
In the mid way: Though strange to us it seemed
At first, that Angel should with Angel war,
And in fierce hosting meet, who wont to meet
So oft in festivals of joy and love
Unanimous, as sons of one great Sire,
Hymning the Eternal Father: But the shout
Of battle now began, and rushing sound
Of onset ended soon each milder thought.
High in the midst, exalted as a God,
The Apostate in his sun-bright chariot sat,
Idol of majesty divine, enclosed
With flaming Cherubim, and golden shields;
Then lighted from his gorgeous throne, for now
’Twixt host and host but narrow space was left,
A dreadful interval, and front to front
Presented stood in terrible array
Of hideous length: Before the cloudy van,
On the rough edge of battle ere it joined,
Satan, with vast and haughty strides advanced,
Came towering, armed in adamant and gold;
Abdiel that sight endured not, where he stood
Among the mightiest, bent on highest deeds,
And thus his own undaunted heart explores.
O Heaven! that such resemblance of the Highest
Should yet remain, where faith and realty
Remain not: Wherefore should not strength and might
There fail where virtue fails, or weakest prove
Where boldest, though to fight unconquerable?
His puissance, trusting in the Almighty’s aid,
I mean to try, whose reason I have tried
Unsound and false; nor is it aught but just,
That he, who in debate of truth hath won,
Should win in arms, in both disputes alike
Victor; though brutish that contest and foul,
When reason hath to deal with force, yet so
Most reason is that reason overcome.
So pondering, and from his armed peers
Forth stepping opposite, half-way he met
His daring foe, at this prevention more
Incensed, and thus securely him defied.
Proud, art thou met? thy hope was to have reached
The highth of thy aspiring unopposed,
The throne of God unguarded, and his side
Abandoned, at the terrour of thy power
Or potent tongue: Fool! not to think how vain
Against the Omnipotent to rise in arms;
Who out of smallest things could, without end,
Have raised incessant armies to defeat
Thy folly; or with solitary hand
Reaching beyond all limit, at one blow,
Unaided, could have finished thee, and whelmed
Thy legions under darkness: But thou seest
All are not of thy train; there be, who faith
Prefer, and piety to God, though then
To thee not visible, when I alone
Seemed in thy world erroneous to dissent
From all: My sect thou seest; now learn too late
How few sometimes may know, when thousands err.
Whom the grand foe, with scornful eye askance,
Thus answered. Ill for thee, but in wished hour
Of my revenge, first sought for, thou returnest
From flight, seditious Angel! to receive
Thy merited reward, the first assay
Of this right hand provoked, since first that tongue,
Inspired with contradiction, durst oppose
A third part of the Gods, in synod met
Their deities to assert; who, while they feel
Vigour divine within them, can allow
Omnipotence to none. But well thou comest
Before thy fellows, ambitious to win
From me some plume, that thy success may show
Destruction to the rest: This pause between,
(Unanswered lest thou boast) to let thee know,
At first I thought that Liberty and Heaven
To heavenly souls had been all one; but now
I see that most through sloth had rather serve,
Ministring Spirits, trained up in feast and song!
Such hast thou armed, the minstrelsy of Heaven,
Servility with freedom to contend,
As both their deeds compared this day shall prove.
To whom in brief thus Abdiel stern replied.
Apostate! still thou errest, nor end wilt find
Of erring, from the path of truth remote:
Unjustly thou depravest it with the name
Of servitude, to serve whom God ordains,
Or Nature: God and Nature bid the same,
When he who rules is worthiest, and excels
Them whom he governs. This is servitude,
To serve the unwise, or him who hath rebelled
Against his worthier, as thine now serve thee,
Thyself not free, but to thyself enthralled;
Yet lewdly darest our ministring upbraid.
Reign thou in Hell, thy kingdom; let me serve
In Heaven God ever blest, and his divine
Behests obey, worthiest to be obeyed;
Yet chains in Hell, not realms, expect: Mean while
From me returned, as erst thou saidst, from flight,
This greeting on thy impious crest receive.
So saying, a noble stroke he lifted high,
Which hung not, but so swift with tempest fell
On the proud crest of Satan, that no sight,
Nor motion of swift thought, less could his shield,
Such ruin intercept: Ten paces huge
He back recoiled; the tenth on bended knee
His massy spear upstaid; as if on earth
Winds under ground, or waters forcing way,
Sidelong had pushed a mountain from his seat,
Half sunk with all his pines. Amazement seised
The rebel Thrones, but greater rage, to see
Thus foiled their mightiest; ours joy filled, and shout,
Presage of victory, and fierce desire
Of battle: Whereat Michael bid sound
The Arch-Angel trumpet; through the vast of Heaven
It sounded, and the faithful armies rung
Hosanna to the Highest: Nor stood at gaze
The adverse legions, nor less hideous joined
The horrid shock. Now storming fury rose,
And clamour such as heard in Heaven till now
Was never; arms on armour clashing brayed
Horrible discord, and the madding wheels
Of brazen chariots raged; dire was the noise
Of conflict; over head the dismal hiss
Of fiery darts in flaming vollies flew,
And flying vaulted either host with fire.
So under fiery cope together rushed
Both battles main, with ruinous assault
And inextinguishable rage. All Heaven
Resounded; and had Earth been then, all Earth
Had to her center shook. What wonder? when
Millions of fierce encountering Angels fought
On either side, the least of whom could wield
These elements, and arm him with the force
Of all their regions: How much more of power
Army against army numberless to raise
Dreadful combustion warring, and disturb,
Though not destroy, their happy native seat;
Had not the Eternal King Omnipotent,
From his strong hold of Heaven, high over-ruled
And limited their might; though numbered such
As each divided legion might have seemed
A numerous host; in strength each armed hand
A legion; led in fight, yet leader seemed
Each warriour single as in chief, expert
When to advance, or stand, or turn the sway
Of battle, open when, and when to close
The ridges of grim war: No thought of flight,
None of retreat, no unbecoming deed
That argued fear; each on himself relied,
As only in his arm the moment lay
Of victory: Deeds of eternal fame
Were done, but infinite; for wide was spread
That war and various; sometimes on firm ground
A standing fight, then, soaring on main wing,
Tormented all the air; all air seemed then
Conflicting fire. Long time in even scale
The battle hung; till Satan, who that day
Prodigious power had shown, and met in arms
No equal, ranging through the dire attack
Of fighting Seraphim confused, at length
Saw where the sword of Michael smote, and felled
Squadrons at once; with huge two-handed sway
Brandished aloft, the horrid edge came down
Wide-wasting; such destruction to withstand
He hasted, and opposed the rocky orb
Of tenfold adamant, his ample shield,
A vast circumference. At his approach
The great Arch-Angel from his warlike toil
Surceased, and glad, as hoping here to end
Intestine war in Heaven, the arch-foe subdued
Or captive dragged in chains, with hostile frown
And visage all inflamed first thus began.
Author of evil, unknown till thy revolt,
Unnamed in Heaven, now plenteous as thou seest
These acts of hateful strife, hateful to all,
Though heaviest by just measure on thyself,
And thy adherents: How hast thou disturbed
Heaven’s blessed peace, and into nature brought
Misery, uncreated till the crime
Of thy rebellion! how hast thou instilled
Thy malice into thousands, once upright
And faithful, now proved false! But think not here
To trouble holy rest; Heaven casts thee out
From all her confines. Heaven, the seat of bliss,
Brooks not the works of violence and war.
Hence then, and evil go with thee along,
Thy offspring, to the place of evil, Hell;
Thou and thy wicked crew! there mingle broils,
Ere this avenging sword begin thy doom,
Or some more sudden vengeance, winged from God,
Precipitate thee with augmented pain.
So spake the Prince of Angels; to whom thus
The Adversary. Nor think thou with wind
Of aery threats to awe whom yet with deeds
Thou canst not. Hast thou turned the least of these
To flight, or if to fall, but that they rise
Unvanquished, easier to transact with me
That thou shouldst hope, imperious, and with threats
To chase me hence? err not, that so shall end
The strife which thou callest evil, but we style
The strife of glory; which we mean to win,
Or turn this Heaven itself into the Hell
Thou fablest; here however to dwell free,
If not to reign: Mean while thy utmost force,
And join him named Almighty to thy aid,
I fly not, but have sought thee far and nigh.
They ended parle, and both addressed for fight
Unspeakable; for who, though with the tongue
Of Angels, can relate, or to what things
Liken on earth conspicuous, that may lift
Human imagination to such highth
Of Godlike power? for likest Gods they seemed,
Stood they or moved, in stature, motion, arms,
Fit to decide the empire of great Heaven.
Now waved their fiery swords, and in the air
Made horrid circles; two broad suns their shields
Blazed opposite, while Expectation stood
In horrour: From each hand with speed retired,
Where erst was thickest fight, the angelick throng,
And left large field, unsafe within the wind
Of such commotion; such as, to set forth
Great things by small, if, nature’s concord broke,
Among the constellations war were sprung,
Two planets, rushing from aspect malign
Of fiercest opposition, in mid sky
Should combat, and their jarring spheres confound.
Together both with next to almighty arm
Up-lifted imminent, one stroke they aimed
That might determine, and not need repeat,
As not of power at once; nor odds appeared
In might or swift prevention: But the sword
Of Michael from the armoury of God
Was given him tempered so, that neither keen
Nor solid might resist that edge: it met
The sword of Satan, with steep force to smite
Descending, and in half cut sheer; nor staid,
But with swift wheel reverse, deep entering, shared
All his right side: Then Satan first knew pain,
And writhed him to and fro convolved; so sore
The griding sword with discontinuous wound
Passed through him: But the ethereal substance closed,
Not long divisible; and from the gash
A stream of necturous humour issuing flowed
Sanguine, such as celestial Spirits may bleed,
And all his armour stained, ere while so bright.
Forthwith on all sides to his aid was run
By Angels many and strong, who interposed
Defence, while others bore him on their shields
Back to his chariot, where it stood retired
From off the files of war: There they him laid
Gnashing for anguish, and despite, and shame,
To find himself not matchless, and his pride
Humbled by such rebuke, so far beneath
His confidence to equal God in power.
Yet soon he healed; for Spirits that live throughout
Vital in every part, not as frail man
In entrails, heart of head, liver or reins,
Cannot but by annihilating die;
Nor in their liquid texture mortal wound
Receive, no more than can the fluid air:
All heart they live, all head, all eye, all ear,
All intellect, all sense; and, as they please,
They limb themselves, and colour, shape, or size
Assume, as likes them best, condense or rare.
Mean while in other parts like deeds deserved
Memorial, where the might of Gabriel fought,
And with fierce ensigns pierced the deep array
Of Moloch, furious king; who him defied,
And at his chariot-wheels to drag him bound
Threatened, nor from the Holy One of Heaven
Refrained his tongue blasphemous; but anon
Down cloven to the waist, with shattered arms
And uncouth pain fled bellowing. On each wing
Uriel, and Raphael, his vaunting foe,
Though huge, and in a rock of diamond armed,
Vanquished Adramelech, and Asmadai,
Two potent Thrones, that to be less than Gods
Disdained, but meaner thoughts learned in their flight,
Mangled with ghastly wounds through plate and mail.
Nor stood unmindful Abdiel to annoy
The atheist crew, but with redoubled blow
Ariel, and Arioch, and the violence
Of Ramiel scorched and blasted, overthrew.
I might relate of thousands, and their names
Eternize here on earth; but those elect
Angels, contented with their fame in Heaven,
Seek not the praise of men: The other sort,
In might though wonderous and in acts of war,
Nor of renown less eager, yet by doom
Cancelled from Heaven and sacred memory,
Nameless in dark oblivion let them dwell.
For strength from truth divided, and from just,
Illaudable, nought merits but dispraise
And ignominy; yet to glory aspires
Vain-glorious, and through infamy seeks fame:
Therefore eternal silence be their doom.
And now, their mightiest quelled, the battle swerved,
With many an inroad gored; deformed rout
Entered, and foul disorder; all the ground
With shivered armour strown, and on a heap
Chariot and charioteer lay overturned,
And fiery-foaming steeds; what stood, recoiled
O’er-wearied, through the faint Satanick host
Defensive scarce, or with pale fear surprised,
Then first with fear surprised, and sense of pain,
Fled ignominious, to such evil brought
By sin of disobedience; till that hour
Not liable to fear, or flight, or pain.
Far otherwise the inviolable Saints,
In cubick phalanx firm, advanced entire,
Invulnerable, impenetrably armed;
Such high advantages their innocence
Gave them above their foes; not to have sinned,
Not to have disobeyed; in fight they stood
Unwearied, unobnoxious to be pained
By wound, though from their place by violence moved,
Now Night her course began, and, over Heaven
Inducing darkness, grateful truce imposed,
And silence on the odious din of war:
Under her cloudy covert both retired,
Victor and vanquished: On the foughten field
Michael and his Angels prevalent
Encamping, placed in guard their watches round,
Cherubick waving fires: On the other part,
Satan with his rebellious disappeared,
Far in the dark dislodged; and, void of rest,
His potentates to council called by night;
And in the midst thus undismayed began.
O now in danger tried, now known in arms
Not to be overpowered, Companions dear,
Found worthy not of liberty alone,
Too mean pretence! but what we more affect,
Honour, dominion, glory, and renown;
Who have sustained one day in doubtful fight,
(And if one day, why not eternal days?)
What Heaven’s Lord had powerfullest to send
Against us from about his throne, and judged
Sufficient to subdue us to his will,
But proves not so: Then fallible, it seems,
Of future we may deem him, though till now
Omniscient thought. True is, less firmly armed,
Some disadvantage we endured and pain,
Till now not known, but, known, as soon contemned;
Since now we find this our empyreal form
Incapable of mortal injury,
Imperishable, and, though pierced with wound,
Soon closing, and by native vigour healed.
Of evil then so small as easy think
The remedy; perhaps more valid arms,
Weapons more violent, when next we meet,
May serve to better us, and worse our foes,
Or equal what between us made the odds,
In nature none: If other hidden cause
Left them superiour, while we can preserve
Unhurt our minds, and understanding sound,
Due search and consultation will disclose.
He sat; and in the assembly next upstood
Nisroch, of Principalities the prime;
As one he stood escaped from cruel fight,
Sore toiled, his riven arms to havock hewn,
And cloudy in aspect thus answering spake.
Deliverer from new Lords, leader to free
Enjoyment of our right as Gods; yet hard
For Gods, and too unequal work we find,
Against unequal arms to fight in pain,
Against unpained, impassive; from which evil
Ruin must needs ensue; for what avails
Valour or strength, though matchless, quelled with pain
Which all subdues, and makes remiss the hands
Of mightiest? Sense of pleasure we may well
Spare out of life perhaps, and not repine,
But live content, which is the calmest life:
But pain is perfect misery, the worst
Of evils, and, excessive, overturns
All patience. He, who therefore can invent
With what more forcible we may offend
Our yet unwounded enemies, or arm
Ourselves with like defence, to me deserves
No less than for deliverance what we owe.
Whereto with look composed Satan replied.
Not uninvented that, which thou aright
Believest so main to our success, I bring.
Which of us who beholds the bright surface
Of this ethereous mould whereon we stand,
This continent of spacious Heaven, adorned
With plant, fruit, flower ambrosial, gems, and gold;
Whose eye so superficially surveys
These things, as not to mind from whence they grow
Deep under ground, materials dark and crude,
Of spiritous and fiery spume, till touched
With Heaven’s ray, and tempered, they shoot forth
So beauteous, opening to the ambient light?
These in their dark nativity the deep
Shall yield us, pregnant with infernal flame;
Which, into hollow engines, long and round,
Thick rammed, at the other bore with touch of fire
Dilated and infuriate, shall send forth
From far, with thundering noise, among our foes
Such implements of mischief, as shall dash
To pieces, and o’erwhelm whatever stands
Adverse, that they shall fear we have disarmed
The Thunderer of his only dreaded bolt.
Nor long shall be our labour; yet ere dawn,
Effect shall end our wish. Mean while revive;
Abandon fear; to strength and counsel joined
Think nothing hard, much less to be despaired.
He ended, and his words their drooping cheer
Enlightened, and their languished hope revived.
The invention all admired, and each, how he
To be the inventer missed; so easy it seemed
Once found, which yet unfound most would have thought
Impossible: Yet, haply, of thy race
In future days, if malice should abound,
Some one intent on mischief, or inspired
With devilish machination, might devise
Like instrument to plague the sons of men
For sin, on war and mutual slaughter bent.
Forthwith from council to the work they flew;
None arguing stood; innumerable hands
Were ready; in a moment up they turned
Wide the celestial soil, and saw beneath
The originals of nature in their crude
Conception; sulphurous and nitrous foam
They found, they mingled, and, with subtle art,
Concocted and adusted they reduced
To blackest grain, and into store conveyed:
Part hidden veins digged up (nor hath this earth
Entrails unlike) of mineral and stone,
Whereof to found their engines and their balls
Of missive ruin; part incentive reed
Provide, pernicious with one touch to fire.
So all ere day-spring, under conscious night,
Secret they finished, and in order set,
With silent circumspection, unespied.
Now when fair morn orient in Heaven appeared,
Up rose the victor-Angels, and to arms
The matin trumpet sung: In arms they stood
Of golden panoply, refulgent host,
Soon banded; others from the dawning hills
Look round, and scouts each coast light-armed scour,
Each quarter to descry the distant foe,
Where lodged, or whither fled, or if for fight,
In motion or in halt: Him soon they met
Under spread ensigns moving nigh, in slow
But firm battalion; back with speediest sail
Zophiel, of Cherubim the swiftest wing,
Came flying, and in mid air aloud thus cried.
Arm, Warriours, arm for fight; the foe at hand,
Whom fled we thought, will save us long pursuit
This day; fear not his flight; so thick a cloud
He comes, and settled in his face I see
Sad resolution, and secure: Let each
His adamantine coat gird well, and each
Fit well his helm, gripe fast his orbed shield,
Borne even or high; for this day will pour down,
If I conjecture aught, no drizzling shower,
But rattling storm of arrows barbed with fire.
So warned he them, aware themselves, and soon
In order, quit of all impediment;
Instant without disturb they took alarm,
And onward moved embattled: When behold!
Not distant far with heavy pace the foe
Approaching gross and huge, in hollow cube
Training his devilish enginery, impaled
On every side with shadowing squadrons deep,
To hide the fraud. At interview both stood
A while; but suddenly at head appeared
Satan, and thus was heard commanding loud.
Vanguard, to right and left the front unfold;
That all may see who hate us, how we seek
Peace and composure, and with open breast
Stand ready to receive them, if they like
Our overture; and turn not back perverse:
But that I doubt; however witness, Heaven!
Heaven, witness thou anon! while we discharge
Freely our part: ye, who appointed stand
Do as you have in charge, and briefly touch
What we propound, and loud that all may hear!
So scoffing in ambiguous words, he scarce
Had ended; when to right and left the front
Divided, and to either flank retired:
Which to our eyes discovered, new and strange,
A triple mounted row of pillars laid
On wheels (for like to pillars most they seemed,
Or hollowed bodies made of oak or fir,
With branches lopt, in wood or mountain felled,)
Brass, iron, stony mould, had not their mouths
With hideous orifice gaped on us wide,
Portending hollow truce: At each behind
A Seraph stood, and in his hand a reed
Stood waving tipt with fire; while we, suspense,
Collected stood within our thoughts amused,
Not long; for sudden all at once their reeds
Put forth, and to a narrow vent applied
With nicest touch. Immediate in a flame,
But soon obscured with smoke, all Heaven appeared,
From those deep-throated engines belched, whose roar
Embowelled with outrageous noise the air,
And all her entrails tore, disgorging foul
Their devilish glut, chained thunderbolts and hail
Of iron globes; which, on the victor host
Levelled, with such impetuous fury smote,
That, whom they hit, none on their feet might stand,
Though standing else as rocks, but down they fell
By thousands, Angel on Arch-Angel rolled;
The sooner for their arms; unarmed, they might
Have easily, as Spirits, evaded swift
By quick contraction or remove; but now
Foul dissipation followed, and forced rout;
Nor served it to relax their serried files.
What should they do? if on they rushed, repulse
Repeated, and indecent overthrow
Doubled, would render them yet more despised,
And to their foes a laughter; for in view
Stood ranked of Seraphim another row,
In posture to displode their second tire
Of thunder: Back defeated to return
They worse abhorred. Satan beheld their plight,
And to his mates thus in derision called.
O Friends! why come not on these victors proud
Ere while they fierce were coming; and when we,
To entertain them fair with open front
And breast, (what could we more?) propounded terms
Of composition, straight they changed their minds,
Flew off, and into strange vagaries fell,
As they would dance; yet for a dance they seemed
Somewhat extravagant and wild; perhaps
For joy of offered peace: But I suppose,
If our proposals once again were heard,
We should compel them to a quick result.
To whom thus Belial, in like gamesome mood.
Leader! the terms we sent were terms of weight,
Of hard contents, and full of force urged home;
Such as we might perceive amused them all,
And stumbled many: Who receives them right,
Had need from head to foot well understand;
Not understood, this gift they have besides,
They show us when our foes walk not upright.
So they among themselves in pleasant vein
Stood scoffing, hightened in their thoughts beyond
All doubt of victory: Eternal Might
To match with their inventions they presumed
So easy, and of his thunder made a scorn,
And all his host derided, while they stood
A while in trouble: But they stood not long;
Rage prompted them at length, and found them arms
Against such hellish mischief fit to oppose.
Forthwith (behold the excellence, the power,
Which God hath in his mighty Angels placed!)
Their arms away they threw, and to the hills
(For Earth hath this variety from Heaven
Of pleasure situate in hill and dale,)
Light as the lightning glimpse they ran, they flew;
From their foundations loosening to and fro,
They plucked the seated hills, with all their load,
Rocks, waters, woods, and by the shaggy tops
Up-lifting bore them in their hands: Amaze,
Be sure, and terrour, seized the rebel host,
When coming towards them so dread they saw
The bottom of the mountains upward turned;
Till on those cursed engines’ triple-row
They saw them whelmed, and all their confidence
Under the weight of mountains buried deep;
Themselves invaded next, and on their heads
Main promontories flung, which in the air
Came shadowing, and oppressed whole legions armed;
Their armour helped their harm, crushed in and bruised
Into their substance pent, which wrought them pain
Implacable, and many a dolorous groan;
Long struggling underneath, ere they could wind
Out of such prison, though Spirits of purest light,
Purest at first, now gross by sinning grown.
The rest, in imitation, to like arms
Betook them, and the neighbouring hills uptore:
So hills amid the air encountered hills,
Hurled to and fro with jaculation dire;
That under ground they fought in dismal shade;
Infernal noise! war seemed a civil game
To this uproar; horrid confusion heaped
Upon confusion rose: And now all Heaven
Had gone to wrack, with ruin overspread;
Had not the Almighty Father, where he sits
Shrined in his sanctuary of Heaven secure,
Consulting on the sum of things, foreseen
This tumult, and permitted all, advised:
That his great purpose he might so fulfil,
To honour his anointed Son avenged
Upon his enemies, and to declare
All power on him transferred: Whence to his Son,
The Assessour of his throne, he thus began.
Effulgence of my glory, Son beloved,
Son, in whose face invisible is beheld
Visibly, what by Deity I am;
And in whose hand what by decree I do,
Second Omnipotence! two days are past,
Two days, as we compute the days of Heaven,
Since Michael and his Powers went forth to tame
These disobedient: Sore hath been their fight,
As likeliest was, when two such foes met armed;
For to themselves I left them; and thou knowest,
Equal in their creation they were formed,
Save what sin hath impaired; which yet hath wrought
Insensibly, for I suspend their doom;
Whence in perpetual fight they needs must last
Endless, and no solution will be found:
War wearied hath performed what war can do,
And to disordered rage let loose the reins
With mountains, as with weapons, armed; which makes
Wild work in Heaven, and dangerous to the main.
Two days are therefore past, the third is thine;
For thee I have ordained it; and thus far
Have suffered, that the glory may be thine
Of ending this great war, since none but Thou
Can end it. Into thee such virtue and grace
Immense I have transfused, that all may know
In Heaven and Hell thy power above compare;
And, this perverse commotion governed thus,
To manifest thee worthiest to be Heir
Of all things; to be Heir, and to be King
By sacred unction, thy deserved right.
Go then, Thou Mightiest, in thy Father’s might;
Ascend my chariot, guide the rapid wheels
That shake Heaven’s basis, bring forth all my war,
My bow and thunder, my almighty arms
Gird on, and sword upon thy puissant thigh;
Pursue these sons of darkness, drive them out
From all Heaven’s bounds into the utter deep:
There let them learn, as likes them, to despise
God, and Messiah his anointed King.
He said, and on his Son with rays direct
Shone full; he all his Father full expressed
Ineffably into his face received;
And thus the Filial Godhead answering spake.
O Father, O Supreme of heavenly Thrones,
First, Highest, Holiest, Best; thou always seek’st
To glorify thy Son, I always thee,
As is most just: This I my glory account,
My exaltation, and my whole delight,
That thou, in me well pleased, declarest thy will
Fulfilled, which to fulfil is all my bliss.
Scepter and power, thy giving, I assume,
And gladlier shall resign, when in the end
Thou shalt be all in all, and I in thee
For ever; and in me all whom thou lovest:
But whom thou hatest, I hate, and can put on
Thy terrours, as I put thy mildness on,
Image of thee in all things; and shall soon,
Armed with thy might, rid Heaven of these rebelled;
To their prepared ill mansion driven down,
To chains of darkness, and the undying worm;
That from thy just obedience could revolt,
Whom to obey is happiness entire.
Then shall thy Saints unmixed, and from the impure
Far separate, circling thy holy mount,
Unfeigned Halleluiahs to thee sing,
Hymns of high praise, and I among them Chief.
So said, he, o’er his scepter bowing, rose
From the right hand of Glory where he sat;
And the third sacred morn began to shine,
Dawning through Heaven. Forth rushed with whirlwind sound
The chariot of Paternal Deity,
Flashing thick flames, wheel within wheel undrawn,
Itself instinct with Spirit, but convoyed
By four Cherubick shapes; four faces each
Had wonderous; as with stars, their bodies all
And wings were set with eyes; with eyes the wheels
Of beryl, and careering fires between;
Over their heads a crystal firmament,
Whereon a sapphire throne, inlaid with pure
Amber, and colours of the showery arch.
He, in celestial panoply all armed
Of radiant Urim, work divinely wrought,
Ascended; at his right hand Victory
Sat eagle-winged; beside him hung his bow
And quiver with three-bolted thunder stored;
And from about him fierce effusion rolled
Of smoke, and bickering flame, and sparkles dire:
Attended with ten thousand thousand Saints,
He onward came; far off his coming shone;
And twenty thousand (I their number heard)
Chariots of God, half on each hand, were seen;
He on the wings of Cherub rode sublime
On the crystalline sky, in sapphire throned,
Illustrious far and wide; but by his own
First seen: Them unexpected joy surprised,
When the great ensign of Messiah blazed
Aloft by Angels borne, his sign in Heaven;
Under whose conduct Michael soon reduced
His army, circumfused on either wing,
Under their Head imbodied all in one.
Before him Power Divine his way prepared;
At his command the uprooted hills retired
Each to his place; they heard his voice, and went
Obsequious; Heaven his wonted face renewed,
And with fresh flowerets hill and valley smiled.
This saw his hapless foes, but stood obdured,
And to rebellious fight rallied their Powers,
Insensate, hope conceiving from despair.
In heavenly Spirits could such perverseness dwell?
But to convince the proud what signs avail,
Or wonders move the obdurate to relent?
They, hardened more by what might most reclaim,
Grieving to see his glory, at the sight
Took envy; and, aspiring to his highth,
Stood re-embattled fierce, by force or fraud
Weening to prosper, and at length prevail
Against God and Messiah, or to fall
In universal ruin last; and now
To final battle drew, disdaining flight,
Or faint retreat; when the great Son of God
To all his host on either hand thus spake.
Stand still in bright array, ye Saints; here stand,
Ye Angels armed; this day from battle rest:
Faithful hath been your warfare, and of God
Accepted, fearless in his righteous cause;
And as ye have received, so have ye done,
Invincibly: But of this cursed crew
The punishment to other hand belongs;
Vengeance is his, or whose he sole appoints:
Number to this day’s work is not ordained,
Nor multitude; stand only, and behold
God’s indignation on these godless poured
By me; not you, but me, they have despised,
Yet envied; against me is all their rage,
Because the Father, to whom in Heaven s’preme
Kingdom, and power, and glory appertains,
Hath honoured me, according to his will.
Therefore to me their doom he hath assigned;
That they may have their wish, to try with me
In battle which the stronger proves; they all,
Or I alone against them; since by strength
They measure all, of other excellence
Not emulous, nor care who them excels;
Nor other strife with them do I vouchsafe.
So spake the Son, and into terrour changed
His countenance too severe to be beheld,
And full of wrath bent on his enemies.
At once the Four spread out their starry wings
With dreadful shade contiguous, and the orbs
Of his fierce chariot rolled, as with the sound
Of torrent floods, or of a numerous host.
He on his impious foes right onward drove,
Gloomy as night; under his burning wheels
The stedfast empyrean shook throughout,
All but the throne itself of God. Full soon
Among them he arrived; in his right hand
Grasping ten thousand thunders, which he sent
Before him, such as in their souls infixed
Plagues: They, astonished, all resistance lost,
All courage; down their idle weapons dropt:
O’er shields, and helms, and helmed heads he rode
Of Thrones and mighty Seraphim prostrate,
That wished the mountains now might be again
Thrown on them, as a shelter from his ire.
Nor less on either side tempestuous fell
His arrows, from the fourfold-visaged Four
Distinct with eyes, and from the living wheels
Distinct alike with multitude of eyes;
One Spirit in them ruled; and every eye
Glared lightning, and shot forth pernicious fire
Among the accursed, that withered all their strength,
And of their wonted vigour left them drained,
Exhausted, spiritless, afflicted, fallen.
Yet half his strength he put not forth, but checked
His thunder in mid volley; for he meant
Not to destroy, but root them out of Heaven:
The overthrown he raised, and as a herd
Of goats or timorous flock together thronged
Drove them before him thunder-struck, pursued
With terrours, and with furies, to the bounds
And crystal wall of Heaven; which, opening wide,
Rolled inward, and a spacious gap disclosed
Into the wasteful deep: The monstrous sight
Struck them with horrour backward, but far worse
Urged them behind: Headlong themselves they threw
Down from the verge of Heaven; eternal wrath
Burnt after them to the bottomless pit.
Hell heard the unsufferable noise, Hell saw
Heaven ruining from Heaven, and would have fled
Affrighted; but strict Fate had cast too deep
Her dark foundations, and too fast had bound.
Nine days they fell: Confounded Chaos roared,
And felt tenfold confusion in their fall
Through his wild anarchy, so huge a rout
Incumbered him with ruin: Hell at last
Yawning received them whole, and on them closed;
Hell, their fit habitation, fraught with fire
Unquenchable, the house of woe and pain.
Disburdened Heaven rejoiced, and soon repaired
Her mural breach, returning whence it rolled.
Sole victor, from the expulsion of his foes,
Messiah his triumphal chariot turned:
To meet him all his Saints, who silent stood
Eye-witnesses of his almighty acts,
With jubilee advanced; and, as they went,
Shaded with branching palm, each Order bright,
Sung triumph, and him sung victorious King,
Son, Heir, and Lord, to him dominion given,
Worthiest to reign: He, celebrated, rode
Triumphant through mid Heaven, into the courts
And temple of his Mighty Father throned
On high; who into glory him received,
Where now he sits at the right hand of bliss.
Thus, measuring things in Heaven by things on Earth,
At thy request, and that thou mayest beware
By what is past, to thee I have revealed
What might have else to human race been hid;
The discord which befel, and war in Heaven
Among the angelick Powers, and the deep fall
Of those too high aspiring, who rebelled
With Satan; he who envies now thy state,
Who now is plotting how he may seduce
Thee also from obedience, that, with him
Bereaved of happiness, thou mayest partake
His punishment, eternal misery;
Which would be all his solace and revenge,
As a despite done against the Most High,
Thee once to gain companion of his woe.
But listen not to his temptations, warn
Thy weaker; let it profit thee to have heard,
By terrible example, the reward
Of disobedience; firm they might have stood,
Yet fell; remember, and fear to transgress.







Descend from Heaven, Urania, by that name
If rightly thou art called, whose voice divine
Following, above the Olympian hill I soar,
Above the flight of Pegasean wing!
The meaning, not the name, I call: for thou
Nor of the Muses nine, nor on the top
Of old Olympus dwellest; but, heavenly-born,
Before the hills appeared, or fountain flowed,
Thou with eternal Wisdom didst converse,
Wisdom thy sister, and with her didst play
In presence of the Almighty Father, pleased
With thy celestial song. Up led by thee
Into the Heaven of Heavens I have presumed,
An earthly guest, and drawn empyreal air,
Thy tempering: with like safety guided down
Return me to my native element:
Lest from this flying steed unreined, (as once
Bellerophon, though from a lower clime,)
Dismounted, on the Aleian field I fall,
Erroneous there to wander, and forlorn.
Half yet remains unsung, but narrower bound
Within the visible diurnal sphere;
Standing on earth, not rapt above the pole,
More safe I sing with mortal voice, unchanged
To hoarse or mute, though fallen on evil days,
On evil days though fallen, and evil tongues;
In darkness, and with dangers compassed round,
And solitude; yet not alone, while thou
Visitest my slumbers nightly, or when morn
Purples the east: still govern thou my song,
Urania, and fit audience find, though few.
But drive far off the barbarous dissonance
Of Bacchus and his revellers, the race
Of that wild rout that tore the Thracian bard
In Rhodope, where woods and rocks had ears
To rapture, till the savage clamour drowned
Both harp and voice; nor could the Muse defend
Her son. So fail not thou, who thee implores:
For thou art heavenly, she an empty dream.
Say, Goddess, what ensued when Raphael,
The affable Arch-Angel, had forewarned
Adam, by dire example, to beware
Apostasy, by what befel in Heaven
To those apostates; lest the like befall
In Paradise to Adam or his race,
Charged not to touch the interdicted tree,
If they transgress, and slight that sole command,
So easily obeyed amid the choice
Of all tastes else to please their appetite,
Though wandering. He, with his consorted Eve,
The story heard attentive, and was filled
With admiration and deep muse, to hear
Of things so high and strange; things, to their thought
So unimaginable, as hate in Heaven,
And war so near the peace of God in bliss,
With such confusion: but the evil, soon
Driven back, redounded as a flood on those
From whom it sprung; impossible to mix
With blessedness. Whence Adam soon repealed
The doubts that in his heart arose: and now
Led on, yet sinless, with desire to know
What nearer might concern him, how this world
Of Heaven and Earth conspicuous first began;
When, and whereof created; for what cause;
What within Eden, or without, was done
Before his memory; as one whose drouth
Yet scarce allayed still eyes the current stream,
Whose liquid murmur heard new thirst excites,
Proceeded thus to ask his heavenly guest.
Great things, and full of wonder in our ears,
Far differing from this world, thou hast revealed,
Divine interpreter! by favour sent
Down from the empyrean, to forewarn
Us timely of what might else have been our loss,
Unknown, which human knowledge could not reach;
For which to the infinitely Good we owe
Immortal thanks, and his admonishment
Receive, with solemn purpose to observe
Immutably his sovran will, the end
Of what we are. But since thou hast vouchsafed
Gently, for our instruction, to impart
Things above earthly thought, which yet concerned
Our knowing, as to highest wisdom seemed,
Deign to descend now lower, and relate
What may no less perhaps avail us known,
How first began this Heaven which we behold
Distant so high, with moving fires adorned
Innumerable; and this which yields or fills
All space, the ambient air wide interfused
Embracing round this floried Earth; what cause
Moved the Creator, in his holy rest
Through all eternity, so late to build
In Chaos; and the work begun, how soon
Absolved; if unforbid thou mayest unfold
What we, not to explore the secrets ask
Of his eternal empire, but the more
To magnify his works, the more we know.
And the great light of day yet wants to run
Much of his race though steep; suspense in Heaven,
Held by thy voice, thy potent voice, he hears,
And longer will delay to hear thee tell
His generation, and the rising birth
Of Nature from the unapparent Deep:
Or if the star of evening and the moon
Haste to thy audience, Night with her will bring,
Silence; and Sleep, listening to thee, will watch;
Or we can bid his absence, till thy song
End, and dismiss thee ere the morning shine.
Thus Adam his illustrious guest besought:
And thus the Godlike Angel answered mild.
This also thy request, with caution asked,
Obtain; though to recount almighty works
What words or tongue of Seraph can suffice,
Or heart of man suffice to comprehend?
Yet what thou canst attain, which best may serve
To glorify the Maker, and infer
Thee also happier, shall not be withheld
Thy hearing; such commission from above
I have received, to answer thy desire
Of knowledge within bounds; beyond, abstain
To ask; nor let thine own inventions hope
Things not revealed, which the invisible King,
Only Omniscient, hath suppressed in night;
To none communicable in Earth or Heaven:
Enough is left besides to search and know.
But knowledge is as food, and needs no less
Her temperance over appetite, to know
In measure what the mind may well contain;
Oppresses else with surfeit, and soon turns
Wisdom to folly, as nourishment to wind.
Know then, that, after Lucifer from Heaven
(So call him, brighter once amidst the host
Of Angels, than that star the stars among,)
Fell with his flaming legions through the deep
Into his place, and the great Son returned
Victorious with his Saints, the Omnipotent
Eternal Father from his throne beheld
Their multitude, and to his Son thus spake.
At least our envious Foe hath failed, who thought
All like himself rebellious, by whose aid
This inaccessible high strength, the seat
Of Deity supreme, us dispossessed,
He trusted to have seised, and into fraud
Drew many, whom their place knows here no more:
Yet far the greater part have kept, I see,
Their station; Heaven, yet populous, retains
Number sufficient to possess her realms
Though wide, and this high temple to frequent
With ministeries due, and solemn rites:
But, lest his heart exalt him in the harm
Already done, to have dispeopled Heaven,
My damage fondly deemed, I can repair
That detriment, if such it be to lose
Self-lost; and in a moment will create
Another world, out of one man a race
Of men innumerable, there to dwell,
Not here; till, by degrees of merit raised,
They open to themselves at length the way
Up hither, under long obedience tried;
And Earth be changed to Heaven, and Heaven to Earth,
One kingdom, joy and union without end.
Mean while inhabit lax, ye Powers of Heaven;
And thou my Word, begotten Son, by thee
This I perform; speak thou, and be it done!
My overshadowing Spirit and Might with thee
I send along; ride forth, and bid the Deep
Within appointed bounds be Heaven and Earth;
Boundless the Deep, because I Am who fill
Infinitude, nor vacuous the space.
Though I, uncircumscribed myself, retire,
And put not forth my goodness, which is free
To act or not, Necessity and Chance
Approach not me, and what I will is Fate.
So spake the Almighty, and to what he spake
His Word, the Filial Godhead, gave effect.
Immediate are the acts of God, more swift
Than time or motion, but to human ears
Cannot without process of speech be told,
So told as earthly notion can receive.
Great triumph and rejoicing was in Heaven,
When such was heard declared the Almighty’s will;
Glory they sung to the Most High, good will
To future men, and in their dwellings peace;
Glory to Him, whose just avenging ire
Had driven out the ungodly from his sight
And the habitations of the just; to Him
Glory and praise, whose wisdom had ordained
Good out of evil to create; instead
Of Spirits malign, a better race to bring
Into their vacant room, and thence diffuse
His good to worlds and ages infinite.
So sang the Hierarchies: Mean while the Son
On his great expedition now appeared,
Girt with Omnipotence, with radiance crowned
Of Majesty Divine; sapience and love
Immense, and all his Father in him shone.
About his chariot numberless were poured
Cherub, and Seraph, Potentates, and Thrones,
And Virtues, winged Spirits, and chariots winged
From the armoury of God; where stand of old
Myriads, between two brazen mountains lodged
Against a solemn day, harnessed at hand,
Celestial equipage; and now came forth
Spontaneous, for within them Spirit lived,
Attendant on their Lord: Heaven opened wide
Her ever-during gates, harmonious sound
On golden hinges moving, to let forth
The King of Glory, in his powerful Word
And Spirit, coming to create new worlds.
On heavenly ground they stood; and from the shore
They viewed the vast immeasurable abyss
Outrageous as a sea, dark, wasteful, wild,
Up from the bottom turned by furious winds
And surging waves, as mountains, to assault
Heaven’s highth, and with the center mix the pole.
Silence, ye troubled Waves, and thou Deep, peace,
Said then the Omnifick Word; your discord end!
Nor staid; but, on the wings of Cherubim
Uplifted, in paternal glory rode
Far into Chaos, and the world unborn;
For Chaos heard his voice: Him all his train
Followed in bright procession, to behold
Creation, and the wonders of his might.
Then staid the fervid wheels, and in his hand
He took the golden compasses, prepared
In God’s eternal store, to circumscribe
This universe, and all created things:
One foot he centered, and the other turned
Round through the vast profundity obscure;
And said, Thus far extend, thus far thy bounds,
This be thy just circumference, O World!
Thus God the Heaven created, thus the Earth,
Matter unformed and void: Darkness profound
Covered the abyss: but on the watery calm
His brooding wings the Spirit of God outspread,
And vital virtue infused, and vital warmth
Throughout the fluid mass; but downward purged
The black tartareous cold infernal dregs,
Adverse to life: then founded, then conglobed
Like things to like; the rest to several place
Disparted, and between spun out the air;
And Earth self-balanced on her center hung.
Let there be light, said God; and forthwith Light
Ethereal, first of things, quintessence pure,
Sprung from the deep; and from her native east
To journey through the aery gloom began,
Sphered in a radiant cloud, for yet the sun
Was not; she in a cloudy tabernacle
Sojourned the while. God saw the light was good;
And light from darkness by the hemisphere
Divided: light the Day, and darkness Night,
He named. Thus was the first day even and morn:
Nor past uncelebrated, nor unsung
By the celestial quires, when orient light
Exhaling first from darkness they beheld;
Birth-day of Heaven and Earth; with joy and shout
The hollow universal orb they filled,
And touched their golden harps, and hymning praised
God and his works; Creator him they sung,
Both when first evening was, and when first morn.
Again, God said, Let there be firmament
Amid the waters, and let it divide
The waters from the waters; and God made
The firmament, expanse of liquid, pure,
Transparent, elemental air, diffused
In circuit to the uttermost convex
Of this great round; partition firm and sure,
The waters underneath from those above
Dividing: for as earth, so he the world
Built on circumfluous waters calm, in wide
Crystalline ocean, and the loud misrule
Of Chaos far removed; lest fierce extremes
Contiguous might distemper the whole frame:
And Heaven he named the Firmament: So even
And morning chorus sung the second day.
The Earth was formed, but in the womb as yet
Of waters, embryon immature involved,
Appeared not: over all the face of Earth
Main ocean flowed, not idle; but, with warm
Prolifick humour softening all her globe,
Fermented the great mother to conceive,
Satiate with genial moisture; when God said,
Be gathered now ye waters under Heaven
Into one place, and let dry land appear.
Immediately the mountains huge appear
Emergent, and their broad bare backs upheave
Into the clouds; their tops ascend the sky:
So high as heaved the tumid hills, so low
Down sunk a hollow bottom broad and deep,
Capacious bed of waters: Thither they
Hasted with glad precipitance, uprolled,
As drops on dust conglobing from the dry:
Part rise in crystal wall, or ridge direct,
For haste; such flight the great command impressed
On the swift floods: As armies at the call
Of trumpet (for of armies thou hast heard)
Troop to their standard; so the watery throng,
Wave rolling after wave, where way they found,
If steep, with torrent rapture, if through plain,
Soft-ebbing; nor withstood them rock or hill;
But they, or under ground, or circuit wide
With serpent errour wandering, found their way,
And on the washy oose deep channels wore;
Easy, ere God had bid the ground be dry,
All but within those banks, where rivers now
Stream, and perpetual draw their humid train.
The dry land, Earth; and the great receptacle
Of congregated waters, he called Seas:
And saw that it was good; and said, Let the Earth
Put forth the verdant grass, herb yielding seed,
And fruit-tree yielding fruit after her kind,
Whose seed is in herself upon the Earth.
He scarce had said, when the bare Earth, till then
Desart and bare, unsightly, unadorned,
Brought forth the tender grass, whose verdure clad
Her universal face with pleasant green;
Then herbs of every leaf, that sudden flowered
Opening their various colours, and made gay
Her bosom, smelling sweet: and, these scarce blown,
Forth flourished thick the clustering vine, forth crept
The swelling gourd, up stood the corny reed
Embattled in her field, and the humble shrub,
And bush with frizzled hair implicit: Last
Rose, as in dance, the stately trees, and spread
Their branches hung with copious fruit, or gemmed
Their blossoms: With high woods the hills were crowned;
With tufts the valleys, and each fountain side;
With borders long the rivers: that Earth now
Seemed like to Heaven, a seat where Gods might dwell,
Or wander with delight, and love to haunt
Her sacred shades: though God had yet not rained
Upon the Earth, and man to till the ground
None was; but from the Earth a dewy mist
Went up, and watered all the ground, and each
Plant of the field; which, ere it was in the Earth,
God made, and every herb, before it grew
On the green stem: God saw that it was good:
So even and morn recorded the third day.
Again the Almighty spake, Let there be lights
High in the expanse of Heaven, to divide
The day from night; and let them be for signs,
For seasons, and for days, and circling years;
And let them be for lights, as I ordain
Their office in the firmament of Heaven,
To give light on the Earth; and it was so.
And God made two great lights, great for their use
To Man, the greater to have rule by day,
The less by night, altern; and made the stars,
And set them in the firmament of Heaven
To illuminate the Earth, and rule the day
In their vicissitude, and rule the night,
And light from darkness to divide. God saw,
Surveying his great work, that it was good:
For of celestial bodies first the sun
A mighty sphere he framed, unlightsome first,
Though of ethereal mould: then formed the moon
Globose, and every magnitude of stars,
And sowed with stars the Heaven, thick as a field:
Of light by far the greater part he took,
Transplanted from her cloudy shrine, and placed
In the sun’s orb, made porous to receive
And drink the liquid light; firm to retain
Her gathered beams, great palace now of light.
Hither, as to their fountain, other stars
Repairing, in their golden urns draw light,
And hence the morning-planet gilds her horns;
By tincture or reflection they augment
Their small peculiar, though from human sight
So far remote, with diminution seen,
First in his east the glorious lamp was seen,
Regent of day, and all the horizon round
Invested with bright rays, jocund to run
His longitude through Heaven’s high road; the gray
Dawn, and the Pleiades, before him danced,
Shedding sweet influence: Less bright the moon,
But opposite in levelled west was set,
His mirrour, with full face borrowing her light
From him; for other light she needed none
In that aspect, and still that distance keeps
Till night; then in the east her turn she shines,
Revolved on Heaven’s great axle, and her reign
With thousand lesser lights dividual holds,
With thousand thousand stars, that then appeared
Spangling the hemisphere: Then first adorned
With their bright luminaries that set and rose,
Glad evening and glad morn crowned the fourth day.
And God said, Let the waters generate
Reptile with spawn abundant, living soul:
And let fowl fly above the Earth, with wings
Displayed on the open firmament of Heaven.
And God created the great whales, and each
Soul living, each that crept, which plenteously
The waters generated by their kinds;
And every bird of wing after his kind;
And saw that it was good, and blessed them, saying.
Be fruitful, multiply, and in the seas,
And lakes, and running streams, the waters fill;
And let the fowl be multiplied, on the Earth.
Forthwith the sounds and seas, each creek and bay,
With fry innumerable swarm, and shoals
Of fish that with their fins, and shining scales,
Glide under the green wave, in sculls that oft
Bank the mid sea: part single, or with mate,
Graze the sea-weed their pasture, and through groves
Of coral stray; or, sporting with quick glance,
Show to the sun their waved coats dropt with gold;
Or, in their pearly shells at ease, attend
Moist nutriment; or under rocks their food
In jointed armour watch: on smooth the seal
And bended dolphins play: part huge of bulk
Wallowing unwieldy, enormous in their gait,
Tempest the ocean: there leviathan,
Hugest of living creatures, on the deep
Stretched like a promontory sleeps or swims,
And seems a moving land; and at his gills
Draws in, and at his trunk spouts out, a sea.
Mean while the tepid caves, and fens, and shores,
Their brood as numerous hatch, from the egg that soon
Bursting with kindly rupture forth disclosed
Their callow young; but feathered soon and fledge
They summed their pens; and, soaring the air sublime,
With clang despised the ground, under a cloud
In prospect; there the eagle and the stork
On cliffs and cedar tops their eyries build:
Part loosely wing the region, part more wise
In common, ranged in figure, wedge their way,
Intelligent of seasons, and set forth
Their aery caravan, high over seas
Flying, and over lands, with mutual wing
Easing their flight; so steers the prudent crane
Her annual voyage, borne on winds; the air
Floats as they pass, fanned with unnumbered plumes:
From branch to branch the smaller birds with song
Solaced the woods, and spread their painted wings
Till even; nor then the solemn nightingale
Ceased warbling, but all night tun’d her soft lays:
Others, on silver lakes and rivers, bathed
Their downy breast; the swan with arched neck,
Between her white wings mantling proudly, rows
Her state with oary feet; yet oft they quit
The dank, and, rising on stiff pennons, tower
The mid aereal sky: Others on ground
Walked firm; the crested cock whose clarion sounds
The silent hours, and the other whose gay train
Adorns him, coloured with the florid hue
Of rainbows and starry eyes. The waters thus
With fish replenished, and the air with fowl,
Evening and morn solemnized the fifth day.
The sixth, and of creation last, arose
With evening harps and matin; when God said,
Let the Earth bring forth soul living in her kind,
Cattle, and creeping things, and beast of the Earth,
Each in their kind. The Earth obeyed, and straight
Opening her fertile womb teemed at a birth
Innumerous living creatures, perfect forms,
Limbed and full grown: Out of the ground up rose,
As from his lair, the wild beast where he wons
In forest wild, in thicket, brake, or den;
Among the trees in pairs they rose, they walked:
The cattle in the fields and meadows green:
Those rare and solitary, these in flocks
Pasturing at once, and in broad herds upsprung.
The grassy clods now calved; now half appeared
The tawny lion, pawing to get free
His hinder parts, then springs as broke from bonds,
And rampant shakes his brinded mane; the ounce,
The libbard, and the tiger, as the mole
Rising, the crumbled earth above them threw
In hillocks: The swift stag from under ground
Bore up his branching head: Scarce from his mould
Behemoth biggest born of earth upheaved
His vastness: Fleeced the flocks and bleating rose,
As plants: Ambiguous between sea and land
The river-horse, and scaly crocodile.
At once came forth whatever creeps the ground,
Insect or worm: those waved their limber fans
For wings, and smallest lineaments exact
In all the liveries decked of summer’s pride
With spots of gold and purple, azure and green:
These, as a line, their long dimension drew,
Streaking the ground with sinuous trace; not all
Minims of nature; some of serpent-kind,
Wonderous in length and corpulence, involved
Their snaky folds, and added wings. First crept
The parsimonious emmet, provident
Of future; in small room large heart enclosed;
Pattern of just equality perhaps
Hereafter, joined in her popular tribes
Of commonalty: Swarming next appeared
The female bee, that feeds her husband drone
Deliciously, and builds her waxen cells
With honey stored: The rest are numberless,
And thou their natures knowest, and gavest them names,
Needless to thee repeated; nor unknown
The serpent, subtlest beast of all the field,
Of huge extent sometimes, with brazen eyes
And hairy mane terrifick, though to thee
Not noxious, but obedient at thy call.
Now Heaven in all her glory shone, and rolled
Her motions, as the great first Mover’s hand
First wheeled their course: Earth in her rich attire
Consummate lovely smiled; air, water, earth,
By fowl, fish, beast, was flown, was swum, was walked,
Frequent; and of the sixth day yet remained:
There wanted yet the master-work, the end
Of all yet done; a creature, who, not prone
And brute as other creatures, but endued
With sanctity of reason, might erect
His stature, and upright with front serene
Govern the rest, self-knowing; and from thence
Magnanimous to correspond with Heaven,
But grateful to acknowledge whence his good
Descends, thither with heart, and voice, and eyes
Directed in devotion, to adore
And worship God Supreme, who made him chief
Of all his works: therefore the Omnipotent
Eternal Father (for where is not he
Present?) thus to his Son audibly spake.
Let us make now Man in our image, Man
In our similitude, and let them rule
Over the fish and fowl of sea and air,
Beast of the field, and over all the Earth,
And every creeping thing that creeps the ground.
This said, he formed thee, Adam, thee, O Man,
Dust of the ground, and in thy nostrils breathed
The breath of life; in his own image he
Created thee, in the image of God
Express; and thou becamest a living soul.
Male he created thee; but thy consort
Female, for race; then blessed mankind, and said,
Be fruitful, multiply, and fill the Earth;
Subdue it, and throughout dominion hold
Over fish of the sea, and fowl of the air,
And every living thing that moves on the Earth.
Wherever thus created, for no place
Is yet distinct by name, thence, as thou knowest,
He brought thee into this delicious grove,
This garden, planted with the trees of God,
Delectable both to behold and taste;
And freely all their pleasant fruit for food
Gave thee; all sorts are here that all the Earth yields,
Variety without end; but of the tree,
Which, tasted, works knowledge of good and evil,
Thou mayest not; in the day thou eatest, thou diest;
Death is the penalty imposed; beware,
And govern well thy appetite; lest Sin
Surprise thee, and her black attendant Death.
Here finished he, and all that he had made
Viewed, and behold all was entirely good;
So even and morn accomplished the sixth day:
Yet not till the Creator from his work
Desisting, though unwearied, up returned,
Up to the Heaven of Heavens, his high abode;
Thence to behold this new created world,
The addition of his empire, how it showed
In prospect from his throne, how good, how fair,
Answering his great idea. Up he rode
Followed with acclamation, and the sound
Symphonious of ten thousand harps, that tuned
Angelick harmonies: The earth, the air
Resounded, (thou rememberest, for thou heardst,)
The heavens and all the constellations rung,
The planets in their station listening stood,
While the bright pomp ascended jubilant.
Open, ye everlasting gates! they sung,
Open, ye Heavens! your living doors; let in
The great Creator from his work returned
Magnificent, his six days work, a World;
Open, and henceforth oft; for God will deign
To visit oft the dwellings of just men,
Delighted; and with frequent intercourse
Thither will send his winged messengers
On errands of supernal grace. So sung
The glorious train ascending: He through Heaven,
That opened wide her blazing portals, led
To God’s eternal house direct the way;
A broad and ample road, whose dust is gold
And pavement stars, as stars to thee appear,
Seen in the galaxy, that milky way,
Which nightly, as a circling zone, thou seest
Powdered with stars. And now on Earth the seventh
Evening arose in Eden, for the sun
Was set, and twilight from the east came on,
Forerunning night; when at the holy mount
Of Heaven’s high-seated top, the imperial throne
Of Godhead, fixed for ever firm and sure,
The Filial Power arrived, and sat him down
With his great Father; for he also went
Invisible, yet staid, (such privilege
Hath Omnipresence) and the work ordained,
Author and End of all things; and, from work
Now resting, blessed and hallowed the seventh day,
As resting on that day from all his work,
But not in silence holy kept: the harp
Had work and rested not; the solemn pipe,
And dulcimer, all organs of sweet stop,
All sounds on fret by string or golden wire,
Tempered soft tunings, intermixed with voice
Choral or unison: of incense clouds,
Fuming from golden censers, hid the mount.
Creation and the six days acts they sung:
Great are thy works, Jehovah! infinite
Thy power! what thought can measure thee, or tongue
Relate thee! Greater now in thy return
Than from the giant Angels: Thee that day
Thy thunders magnified; but to create
Is greater than created to destroy.
Who can impair thee, Mighty King, or bound
Thy empire! Easily the proud attempt
Of Spirits apostate, and their counsels vain,
Thou hast repelled; while impiously they thought
Thee to diminish, and from thee withdraw
The number of thy worshippers. Who seeks
To lessen thee, against his purpose serves
To manifest the more thy might: his evil
Thou usest, and from thence createst more good.
Witness this new-made world, another Heaven
From Heaven-gate not far, founded in view
On the clear hyaline, the glassy sea;
Of amplitude almost immense, with stars
Numerous, and every star perhaps a world
Of destined habitation; but thou knowest
Their seasons: among these the seat of Men,
Earth, with her nether ocean circumfused,
Their pleasant dwelling-place. Thrice happy Men,
And sons of Men, whom God hath thus advanced!
Created in his image, there to dwell
And worship him; and in reward to rule
Over his works, on earth, in sea, or air,
And multiply a race of worshippers
Holy and just: Thrice happy, if they know
Their happiness, and persevere upright!
So sung they, and the empyrean rung
With halleluiahs: Thus was sabbath kept.
And thy request think now fulfilled, that asked
How first this world and face of things began,
And what before thy memory was done
From the beginning; that posterity,
Informed by thee, might know: If else thou seekest
Aught, not surpassing human measure, say.






The Angel ended, and in Adam’s ear
So charming left his voice, that he a while
Thought him still speaking, still stood fixed to hear;
Then, as new waked, thus gratefully replied.
What thanks sufficient, or what recompence
Equal, have I to render thee, divine
Historian, who thus largely hast allayed
The thirst I had of knowledge, and vouchsafed
This friendly condescension to relate
Things, else by me unsearchable; now heard
With wonder, but delight, and, as is due,
With glory attributed to the high
Creator! Something yet of doubt remains,
Which only thy solution can resolve.
When I behold this goodly frame, this world,
Of Heaven and Earth consisting; and compute
Their magnitudes; this Earth, a spot, a grain,
An atom, with the firmament compared
And all her numbered stars, that seem to roll
Spaces incomprehensible, (for such
Their distance argues, and their swift return
Diurnal,) merely to officiate light
Round this opacous Earth, this punctual spot,
One day and night; in all her vast survey
Useless besides; reasoning I oft admire,
How Nature wise and frugal could commit
Such disproportions, with superfluous hand
So many nobler bodies to create,
Greater so manifold, to this one use,
For aught appears, and on their orbs impose
Such restless revolution day by day
Repeated; while the sedentary Earth,
That better might with far less compass move,
Served by more noble than herself, attains
Her end without least motion, and receives,
As tribute, such a sumless journey brought
Of incorporeal speed, her warmth and light;
Speed, to describe whose swiftness number fails.
So spake our sire, and by his countenance seemed
Entering on studious thoughts abstruse; which Eve
Perceiving, where she sat retired in sight,
With lowliness majestick from her seat,
And grace that won who saw to wish her stay,
Rose, and went forth among her fruits and flowers,
To visit how they prospered, bud and bloom,
Her nursery; they at her coming sprung,
And, touched by her fair tendance, gladlier grew.
Yet went she not, as not with such discourse
Delighted, or not capable her ear
Of what was high: such pleasure she reserved,
Adam relating, she sole auditress;
Her husband the relater she preferred
Before the Angel, and of him to ask
Chose rather; he, she knew, would intermix
Grateful digressions, and solve high dispute
With conjugal caresses: from his lip
Not words alone pleased her. O! when meet now
Such pairs, in love and mutual honour joined?
With Goddess-like demeanour forth she went,
Not unattended; for on her, as Queen,
A pomp of winning Graces waited still,
And from about her shot darts of desire
Into all eyes, to wish her still in sight.
And Raphael now, to Adam’s doubt proposed,
Benevolent and facile thus replied.
To ask or search, I blame thee not; for Heaven
Is as the book of God before thee set,
Wherein to read his wonderous works, and learn
His seasons, hours, or days, or months, or years:
This to attain, whether Heaven move or Earth,
Imports not, if thou reckon right; the rest
From Man or Angel the great Architect
Did wisely to conceal, and not divulge
His secrets to be scanned by them who ought
Rather admire; or, if they list to try
Conjecture, he his fabrick of the Heavens
Hath left to their disputes, perhaps to move
His laughter at their quaint opinions wide
Hereafter; when they come to model Heaven
And calculate the stars, how they will wield
The mighty frame; how build, unbuild, contrive
To save appearances; how gird the sphere
With centrick and eccentrick scribbled o’er,
Cycle and epicycle, orb in orb:
Already by thy reasoning this I guess,
Who art to lead thy offspring, and supposest
That bodies bright and greater should not serve
The less not bright, nor Heaven such journeys run,
Earth sitting still, when she alone receives
The benefit: Consider first, that great
Or bright infers not excellence: the Earth
Though, in comparison of Heaven, so small,
Nor glistering, may of solid good contain
More plenty than the sun that barren shines;
Whose virtue on itself works no effect,
But in the fruitful Earth; there first received,
His beams, unactive else, their vigour find.
Yet not to Earth are those bright luminaries
Officious; but to thee, Earth’s habitant.
And for the Heaven’s wide circuit, let it speak
The Maker’s high magnificence, who built
So spacious, and his line stretched out so far;
That Man may know he dwells not in his own;
An edifice too large for him to fill,
Lodged in a small partition; and the rest
Ordained for uses to his Lord best known.
The swiftness of those circles attribute,
Though numberless, to his Omnipotence,
That to corporeal substances could add
Speed almost spiritual: Me thou thinkest not slow,
Who since the morning-hour set out from Heaven
Where God resides, and ere mid-day arrived
In Eden; distance inexpressible
By numbers that have name. But this I urge,
Admitting motion in the Heavens, to show
Invalid that which thee to doubt it moved;
Not that I so affirm, though so it seem
To thee who hast thy dwelling here on Earth.
God, to remove his ways from human sense,
Placed Heaven from Earth so far, that earthly sight,
If it presume, might err in things too high,
And no advantage gain. What if the sun
Be center to the world; and other stars,
By his attractive virtue and their own
Incited, dance about him various rounds?
Their wandering course now high, now low, then hid,
Progressive, retrograde, or standing still,
In six thou seest; and what if seventh to these
The planet earth, so stedfast though she seem,
Insensibly three different motions move?
Which else to several spheres thou must ascribe,
Moved contrary with thwart obliquities;
Or save the sun his labour, and that swift
Nocturnal and diurnal rhomb supposed,
Invisible else above all stars, the wheel
Of day and night; which needs not thy belief,
If earth, industrious of herself, fetch day
Travelling east, and with her part averse
From the sun’s beam meet night, her other part
Still luminous by his ray. What if that light,
Sent from her through the wide transpicuous air,
To the terrestrial moon be as a star,
Enlightening her by day, as she by night
This earth? reciprocal, if land be there,
Fields and inhabitants: Her spots thou seest
As clouds, and clouds may rain, and rain produce
Fruits in her softened soil for some to eat
Allotted there; and other suns perhaps,
With their attendant moons, thou wilt descry,
Communicating male and female light;
Which two great sexes animate the world,
Stored in each orb perhaps with some that live.
For such vast room in Nature unpossessed
By living soul, desart and desolate,
Only to shine, yet scarce to contribute
Each orb a glimpse of light, conveyed so far
Down to this habitable, which returns
Light back to them, is obvious to dispute.
But whether thus these things, or whether not;
But whether the sun, predominant in Heaven,
Rise on the earth; or earth rise on the sun;
He from the east his flaming road begin;
Or she from west her silent course advance,
With inoffensive pace that spinning sleeps
On her soft axle, while she paces even,
And bears thee soft with the smooth hair along;
Sollicit not thy thoughts with matters hid;
Leave them to God above; him serve, and fear!
Of other creatures, as him pleases best,
Wherever placed, let him dispose; joy thou
In what he gives to thee, this Paradise
And thy fair Eve; Heaven is for thee too high
To know what passes there; be lowly wise:
Think only what concerns thee, and thy being;
Dream not of other worlds, what creatures there
Live, in what state, condition, or degree;
Contented that thus far hath been revealed
Not of Earth only, but of highest Heaven.
To whom thus Adam, cleared of doubt, replied.
How fully hast thou satisfied me, pure
Intelligence of Heaven, Angel serene!
And, freed from intricacies, taught to live
The easiest way; nor with perplexing thoughts
To interrupt the sweet of life, from which
God hath bid dwell far off all anxious cares,
And not molest us; unless we ourselves
Seek them with wandering thoughts, and notions vain.
But apt the mind or fancy is to rove
Unchecked, and of her roving is no end;
Till warned, or by experience taught, she learn,
That, not to know at large of things remote
From use, obscure and subtle; but, to know
That which before us lies in daily life,
Is the prime wisdom: What is more, is fume,
Or emptiness, or fond impertinence:
And renders us, in things that most concern,
Unpractised, unprepared, and still to seek.
Therefore from this high pitch let us descend
A lower flight, and speak of things at hand
Useful; whence, haply, mention may arise
Of something not unseasonable to ask,
By sufferance, and thy wonted favour, deigned.
Thee I have heard relating what was done
Ere my remembrance: now, hear me relate
My story, which perhaps thou hast not heard;
And day is not yet spent; till then thou seest
How subtly to detain thee I devise;
Inviting thee to hear while I relate;
Fond! were it not in hope of thy reply:
For, while I sit with thee, I seem in Heaven;
And sweeter thy discourse is to my ear
Than fruits of palm-tree pleasantest to thirst
And hunger both, from labour, at the hour
Of sweet repast; they satiate, and soon fill,
Though pleasant; but thy words, with grace divine
Imbued, bring to their sweetness no satiety.
To whom thus Raphael answered heavenly meek.
Nor are thy lips ungraceful, Sire of men,
Nor tongue ineloquent; for God on thee
Abundantly his gifts hath also poured
Inward and outward both, his image fair:
Speaking, or mute, all comeliness and grace
Attends thee; and each word, each motion, forms;
Nor less think we in Heaven of thee on Earth
Than of our fellow-servant, and inquire
Gladly into the ways of God with Man:
For God, we see, hath honoured thee, and set
On Man his equal love: Say therefore on;
For I that day was absent, as befel,
Bound on a voyage uncouth and obscure,
Far on excursion toward the gates of Hell;
Squared in full legion (such command we had)
To see that none thence issued forth a spy,
Or enemy, while God was in his work;
Lest he, incensed at such eruption bold,
Destruction with creation might have mixed.
Not that they durst without his leave attempt;
But us he sends upon his high behests
For state, as Sovran King; and to inure
Our prompt obedience. Fast we found, fast shut,
The dismal gates, and barricadoed strong;
But long ere our approaching heard within
Noise, other than the sound of dance or song,
Torment, and loud lament, and furious rage.
Glad we returned up to the coasts of light
Ere sabbath-evening: so we had in charge.
But thy relation now; for I attend,
Pleased with thy words no less than thou with mine.
So spake the Godlike Power, and thus our Sire.
For Man to tell how human life began
Is hard; for who himself beginning knew
Desire with thee still longer to converse
Induced me. As new waked from soundest sleep,
Soft on the flowery herb I found me laid,
In balmy sweat; which with his beams the sun
Soon dried, and on the reeking moisture fed.
Straight toward Heaven my wondering eyes I turned,
And gazed a while the ample sky; till, raised
By quick instinctive motion, up I sprung,
As thitherward endeavouring, and upright
Stood on my feet: about me round I saw
Hill, dale, and shady woods, and sunny plains,
And liquid lapse of murmuring streams; by these,
Creatures that lived and moved, and walked, or flew;
Birds on the branches warbling; all things smiled;
With fragrance and with joy my heart o’erflowed.
Myself I then perused, and limb by limb
Surveyed, and sometimes went, and sometimes ran
With supple joints, as lively vigour led:
But who I was, or where, or from what cause,
Knew not; to speak I tried, and forthwith spake;
My tongue obeyed, and readily could name
Whate’er I saw. Thou Sun, said I, fair light,
And thou enlightened Earth, so fresh and gay,
Ye Hills, and Dales, ye Rivers, Woods, and Plains,
And ye that live and move, fair Creatures, tell,
Tell, if ye saw, how I came thus, how here?—
Not of myself;—by some great Maker then,
In goodness and in power pre-eminent:
Tell me, how may I know him, how adore,
From whom I have that thus I move and live,
And feel that I am happier than I know.—
While thus I called, and strayed I knew not whither,
From where I first drew air, and first beheld
This happy light; when, answer none returned,
On a green shady bank, profuse of flowers,
Pensive I sat me down: There gentle sleep
First found me, and with soft oppression seised
My droused sense, untroubled, though I thought
I then was passing to my former state
Insensible, and forthwith to dissolve:
When suddenly stood at my head a dream,
Whose inward apparition gently moved
My fancy to believe I yet had being,
And lived: One came, methought, of shape divine,
And said, “Thy mansion wants thee, Adam; rise,
First Man, of men innumerable ordained
First Father! called by thee, I come thy guide
To the garden of bliss, thy seat prepared.”
So saying, by the hand he took me raised,
And over fields and waters, as in air
Smooth-sliding without step, last led me up
A woody mountain; whose high top was plain,
A circuit wide, enclosed, with goodliest trees
Planted, with walks, and bowers; that what I saw
Of Earth before scarce pleasant seemed. Each tree,
Loaden with fairest fruit that hung to the eye
Tempting, stirred in me sudden appetite
To pluck and eat; whereat I waked, and found
Before mine eyes all real, as the dream
Had lively shadowed: Here had new begun
My wandering, had not he, who was my guide
Up hither, from among the trees appeared,
Presence Divine. Rejoicing, but with awe,
In adoration at his feet I fell
Submiss: He reared me, and “Whom thou soughtest I am,”
Said mildly, “Author of all this thou seest
Above, or round about thee, or beneath.
This Paradise I give thee, count it thine
To till and keep, and of the fruit to eat:
Of every tree that in the garden grows
Eat freely with glad heart; fear here no dearth:
But of the tree whose operation brings
Knowledge of good and ill, which I have set
The pledge of thy obedience and thy faith,
Amid the garden by the tree of life,
Remember what I warn thee, shun to taste,
And shun the bitter consequence: for know,
The day thou eatest thereof, my sole command
Transgressed, inevitably thou shalt die,
From that day mortal; and this happy state
Shalt lose, expelled from hence into a world
Of woe and sorrow.” Sternly he pronounced
The rigid interdiction, which resounds
Yet dreadful in mine ear, though in my choice
Not to incur; but soon his clear aspect
Returned, and gracious purpose thus renewed.
“Not only these fair bounds, but all the Earth
To thee and to thy race I give; as lords
Possess it, and all things that therein live,
Or live in sea, or air; beast, fish, and fowl.
In sign whereof, each bird and beast behold
After their kinds; I bring them to receive
From thee their names, and pay thee fealty
With low subjection; understand the same
Of fish within their watery residence,
Not hither summoned, since they cannot change
Their element, to draw the thinner air.”
As thus he spake, each bird and beast behold
Approaching two and two; these cowering low
With blandishment; each bird stooped on his wing.
I named them, as they passed, and understood
Their nature, with such knowledge God endued
My sudden apprehension: But in these
I found not what methought I wanted still;
And to the heavenly Vision thus presumed.
O, by what name, for thou above all these,
Above mankind, or aught than mankind higher,
Surpassest far my naming; how may I
Adore thee, Author of this universe,
And all this good to man? for whose well being
So amply, and with hands so liberal,
Thou hast provided all things: But with me
I see not who partakes. In solitude
What happiness, who can enjoy alone,
Or, all enjoying, what contentment find?
Thus I presumptuous; and the Vision bright,
As with a smile more brightened, thus replied.
What callest thou solitude? Is not the Earth
With various living creatures, and the air
Replenished, and all these at thy command
To come and play before thee? Knowest thou not
Their language and their ways? They also know,
And reason not contemptibly: With these
Find pastime, and bear rule; thy realm is large.
So spake the Universal Lord, and seemed
So ordering: I, with leave of speech implored,
And humble deprecation, thus replied.
Let not my words offend thee, Heavenly Power;
My Maker, be propitious while I speak.
Hast thou not made me here thy substitute,
And these inferiour far beneath me set?
Among unequals what society
Can sort, what harmony, or true delight?
Which must be mutual, in proportion due
Given and received; but, in disparity
The one intense, the other still remiss,
Cannot well suit with either, but soon prove
Tedious alike: Of fellowship I speak
Such as I seek, fit to participate
All rational delight: wherein the brute
Cannot be human consort: They rejoice
Each with their kind, lion with lioness;
So fitly them in pairs thou hast combined:
Much less can bird with beast, or fish with fowl
So well converse, nor with the ox the ape;
Worse then can man with beast, and least of all.
Whereto the Almighty answered, not displeased.
A nice and subtle happiness, I see,
Thou to thyself proposest, in the choice
Of thy associates, Adam! and wilt taste
No pleasure, though in pleasure, solitary.
What thinkest thou then of me, and this my state?
Seem I to thee sufficiently possessed
Of happiness, or not? who am alone
From all eternity; for none I know
Second to me or like, equal much less.
How have I then with whom to hold converse,
Save with the creatures which I made, and those
To me inferiour, infinite descents
Beneath what other creatures are to thee?
He ceased; I lowly answered. To attain
The highth and depth of thy eternal ways
All human thoughts come short, Supreme of things!
Thou in thyself art perfect, and in thee
Is no deficience found: Not so is Man,
But in degree; the cause of his desire
By conversation with his like to help
Or solace his defects. No need that thou
Shouldst propagate, already Infinite;
And through all numbers absolute, though One:
But Man by number is to manifest
His single imperfection, and beget
Like of his like, his image multiplied,
In unity defective; which requires
Collateral love, and dearest amity.
Thou in thy secresy although alone,
Best with thyself accompanied, seekest not
Social communication; yet, so pleased,
Canst raise thy creature to what highth thou wilt
Of union or communion, deified:
I, by conversing, cannot these erect
From prone; nor in their ways complacence find.
Thus I emboldened spake, and freedom used
Permissive, and acceptance found; which gained
This answer from the gracious Voice Divine.
Thus far to try thee, Adam, I was pleased;
And find thee knowing, not of beasts alone,
Which thou hast rightly named, but of thyself;
Expressing well the spirit within thee free,
My image, not imparted to the brute;
Whose fellowship therefore unmeet for thee
Good reason was thou freely shouldst dislike;
And be so minded still: I, ere thou spakest,
Knew it not good for Man to be alone;
And no such company as then thou sawest
Intended thee; for trial only brought,
To see how thou couldest judge of fit and meet:
What next I bring shall please thee, be assured,
Thy likeness, thy fit help, thy other self,
Thy wish exactly to thy heart’s desire.
He ended, or I heard no more; for now
My earthly by his heavenly overpowered,
Which it had long stood under, strained to the highth
In that celestial colloquy sublime,
As with an object that excels the sense
Dazzled and spent, sunk down; and sought repair
Of sleep, which instantly fell on me, called
By Nature as in aid, and closed mine eyes.
Mine eyes he closed, but open left the cell
Of fancy, my internal sight; by which,
Abstract as in a trance, methought I saw,
Though sleeping, where I lay, and saw the shape
Still glorious before whom awake I stood:
Who stooping opened my left side, and took
From thence a rib, with cordial spirits warm,
And life-blood streaming fresh; wide was the wound,
But suddenly with flesh filled up and healed:
The rib he formed and fashioned with his hands;
Under his forming hands a creature grew,
Man-like, but different sex; so lovely fair,
That what seemed fair in all the world, seemed now
Mean, or in her summed up, in her contained
And in her looks; which from that time infused
Sweetness into my heart, unfelt before,
And into all things from her air inspired
The spirit of love and amorous delight.
She disappeared, and left me dark; I waked
To find her, or for ever to deplore
Her loss, and other pleasures all abjure:
When out of hope, behold her, not far off,
Such as I saw her in my dream, adorned
With what all Earth or Heaven could bestow
To make her amiable: On she came,
Led by her heavenly Maker, though unseen,
And guided by his voice; nor uninformed
Of nuptial sanctity, and marriage rites:
Grace was in all her steps, Heaven in her eye,
In every gesture dignity and love.
I, overjoyed, could not forbear aloud.
This turn hath made amends; thou hast fulfilled
Thy words, Creator bounteous and benign,
Giver of all things fair! but fairest this
Of all thy gifts! nor enviest. I now see
Bone of my bone, flesh of my flesh, myself
Before me: Woman is her name; of Man
Extracted: for this cause he shall forego
Father and mother, and to his wife adhere;
And they shall be one flesh, one heart, one soul.
She heard me thus; and though divinely brought,
Yet innocence, and virgin modesty,
Her virtue, and the conscience of her worth,
That would be wooed, and not unsought be won,
Not obvious, not obtrusive, but, retired,
The more desirable; or, to say all,
Nature herself, though pure of sinful thought,
Wrought in her so, that, seeing me, she turned:
I followed her; she what was honour knew,
And with obsequious majesty approved
My pleaded reason. To the nuptial bower
I led her blushing like the morn: All Heaven,
And happy constellations, on that hour
Shed their selectest influence; the Earth
Gave sign of gratulation, and each hill;
Joyous the birds; fresh gales and gentle airs
Whispered it to the woods, and from their wings
Flung rose, flung odours from the spicy shrub,
Disporting, till the amorous bird of night
Sung spousal, and bid haste the evening-star
On his hill top, to light the bridal lamp.
Thus have I told thee all my state, and brought
My story to the sum of earthly bliss,
Which I enjoy; and must confess to find
In all things else delight indeed, but such
As, used or not, works in the mind no change,
Nor vehement desire; these delicacies
I mean of taste, sight, smell, herbs, fruits, and flowers,
Walks, and the melody of birds: but here
Far otherwise, transported I behold,
Transported touch; here passion first I felt,
Commotion strange! in all enjoyments else
Superiour and unmoved; here only weak
Against the charm of Beauty’s powerful glance.
Or Nature failed in me, and left some part
Not proof enough such object to sustain;
Or, from my side subducting, took perhaps
More than enough; at least on her bestowed
Too much of ornament, in outward show
Elaborate, of inward less exact.
For well I understand in the prime end
Of Nature her the inferiour, in the mind
And inward faculties, which most excel;
In outward also her resembling less
His image who made both, and less expressing
The character of that dominion given
O’er other creatures: Yet when I approach
Her loveliness, so absolute she seems
And in herself complete, so well to know
Her own, that what she wills to do or say,
Seems wisest, virtuousest, discreetest, best:
All higher knowledge in her presence falls
Degraded; Wisdom in discourse with her
Loses discountenanced, and like Folly shows;
Authority and Reason on her wait,
As one intended first, not after made
Occasionally; and, to consummate all,
Greatness of mind and Nobleness their seat
Build in her loveliest, and create an awe
About her, as a guard angelick placed.
To whom the Angel with contracted brow.
Accuse not Nature, she hath done her part;
Do thou but thine; and be not diffident
Of Wisdom; she deserts thee not, if thou
Dismiss not her, when most thou needest her nigh,
By attributing overmuch to things
Less excellent, as thou thyself perceivest.
For, what admirest thou, what transports thee so,
An outside? fair, no doubt, and worthy well
Thy cherishing, thy honouring, and thy love;
Not thy subjection: Weigh with her thyself;
Then value: Oft-times nothing profits more
Than self-esteem, grounded on just and right
Well managed; of that skill the more thou knowest,
The more she will acknowledge thee her head,
And to realities yield all her shows:
Made so adorn for thy delight the more,
So awful, that with honour thou mayest love
Thy mate, who sees when thou art seen least wise.
But if the sense of touch, whereby mankind
Is propagated, seem such dear delight
Beyond all other; think the same vouchsafed
To cattle and each beast; which would not be
To them made common and divulged, if aught
Therein enjoyed were worthy to subdue
The soul of man, or passion in him move.
What higher in her society thou findest
Attractive, human, rational, love still;
In loving thou dost well, in passion not,
Wherein true love consists not: Love refines
The thoughts, and heart enlarges; hath his seat
In reason, and is judicious; is the scale
By which to heavenly love thou mayest ascend,
Not sunk in carnal pleasure; for which cause,
Among the beasts no mate for thee was found.
To whom thus, half abashed, Adam replied.
Neither her outside formed so fair, nor aught
In procreation common to all kinds,
(Though higher of the genial bed by far,
And with mysterious reverence I deem,)
So much delights me, as those graceful acts,
Those thousand decencies, that daily flow
From all her words and actions mixed with love
And sweet compliance, which declare unfeigned
Union of mind, or in us both one soul;
Harmony to behold in wedded pair
More grateful than harmonious sound to the ear.
Yet these subject not; I to thee disclose
What inward thence I feel, not therefore foiled,
Who meet with various objects, from the sense
Variously representing; yet, still free,
Approve the best, and follow what I approve.
To love, thou blamest me not; for Love, thou sayest,
Leads up to Heaven, is both the way and guide;
Bear with me then, if lawful what I ask:
Love not the heavenly Spirits, and how their love
Express they? by looks only? or do they mix
Irradiance, virtual or immediate touch?
To whom the Angel, with a smile that glowed
Celestial rosy red, Love’s proper hue,
Answered. Let it suffice thee that thou knowest
Us happy, and without love no happiness.
Whatever pure thou in the body enjoyest,
(And pure thou wert created) we enjoy
In eminence; and obstacle find none
Of membrane, joint, or limb, exclusive bars;
Easier than air with air, if Spirits embrace,
Total they mix, union of pure with pure
Desiring, nor restrained conveyance need,
As flesh to mix with flesh, or soul with soul.
But I can now no more; the parting sun
Beyond the Earth’s green Cape and verdant Isles
Hesperian sets, my signal to depart.
Be strong, live happy, and love! But, first of all,
Him, whom to love is to obey, and keep
His great command; take heed lest passion sway
Thy judgement to do aught, which else free will
Would not admit: thine, and of all thy sons,
The weal or woe in thee is placed; beware!
I in thy persevering shall rejoice,
And all the Blest: Stand fast; to stand or fall
Free in thine own arbitrement it lies.
Perfect within, no outward aid require;
And all temptation to transgress repel.
So saying, he arose; whom Adam thus
Followed with benediction. Since to part,
Go, heavenly guest, ethereal Messenger,
Sent from whose sovran goodness I adore!
Gentle to me and affable hath been
Thy condescension, and shall be honoured ever
With grateful memory: Thou to mankind
Be good and friendly still, and oft return!
So parted they; the Angel up to Heaven
From the thick shade, and Adam to his bower.







No more of talk where God or Angel guest
With Man, as with his friend, familiar us’d,
To sit indulgent, and with him partake
Rural repast; permitting him the while
Venial discourse unblam’d. I now must change
Those notes to tragick; foul distrust, and breach
Disloyal on the part of Man, revolt,
And disobedience: on the part of Heaven
Now alienated, distance and distaste,
Anger and just rebuke, and judgement given,
That brought into this world a world of woe,
Sin and her shadow Death, and Misery
Death’s harbinger: Sad task! yet argument
Not less but more heroick than the wrath
Of stern Achilles on his foe pursued
Thrice fugitive about Troy wall; or rage
Of Turnus for Lavinia disespous’d;
Or Neptune’s ire, or Juno’s, that so long
Perplexed the Greek, and Cytherea’s son:
If answerable style I can obtain
Of my celestial patroness, who deigns
Her nightly visitation unimplor’d,
And dictates to me slumbering; or inspires
Easy my unpremeditated verse:
Since first this subject for heroick song
Pleas’d me long choosing, and beginning late;
Not sedulous by nature to indite
Wars, hitherto the only argument
Heroick deem’d chief mastery to dissect
With long and tedious havock fabled knights
In battles feign’d; the better fortitude
Of patience and heroick martyrdom
Unsung; or to describe races and games,
Or tilting furniture, imblazon’d shields,
Impresses quaint, caparisons and steeds,
Bases and tinsel trappings, gorgeous knights
At joust and tournament; then marshall’d feast
Serv’d up in hall with sewers and seneshals;
The skill of artifice or office mean,
Not that which justly gives heroick name
To person, or to poem. Me, of these
Nor skill’d nor studious, higher argument
Remains; sufficient of itself to raise
That name, unless an age too late, or cold
Climate, or years, damp my intended wing
Depress’d; and much they may, if all be mine,
Not hers, who brings it nightly to my ear.
The sun was sunk, and after him the star
Of Hesperus, whose office is to bring
Twilight upon the earth, short arbiter
’Twixt day and night, and now from end to end
Night’s hemisphere had veil’d the horizon round:
When satan, who late fled before the threats
Of Gabriel out of Eden, now improv’d
In meditated fraud and malice, bent
On Man’s destruction, maugre what might hap
Of heavier on himself, fearless returned
By night he fled, and at midnight returned
From compassing the earth; cautious of day,
Since Uriel, regent of the sun, descried
His entrance, and foreworned the Cherubim
That kept their watch; thence full of anguish driven,
The space of seven continued nights he rode
With darkness; thrice the equinoctial line
He circled; four times crossed the car of night
From pole to pole, traversing each colure;
On the eighth returned; and, on the coast averse
From entrance or Cherubick watch, by stealth
Found unsuspected way. There was a place,
Now not, though sin, not time, first wrought the change,
Where Tigris, at the foot of Paradise,
Into a gulf shot under ground, till part
Rose up a fountain by the tree of life:
In with the river sunk, and with it rose
Satan, involved in rising mist; then sought
Where to lie hid; sea he had searched, and land,
From Eden over Pontus and the pool
Maeotis, up beyond the river Ob;
Downward as far antarctick; and in length,
West from Orontes to the ocean barred
At Darien; thence to the land where flows
Ganges and Indus: Thus the orb he roamed
With narrow search; and with inspection deep
Considered every creature, which of all
Most opportune might serve his wiles; and found
The Serpent subtlest beast of all the field.
Him after long debate, irresolute
Of thoughts revolved, his final sentence chose
Fit vessel, fittest imp of fraud, in whom
To enter, and his dark suggestions hide
From sharpest sight: for, in the wily snake
Whatever sleights, none would suspicious mark,
As from his wit and native subtlety
Proceeding; which, in other beasts observed,
Doubt might beget of diabolick power
Active within, beyond the sense of brute.
Thus he resolved, but first from inward grief
His bursting passion into plaints thus poured.
More justly, seat worthier of Gods, as built
With second thoughts, reforming what was old!
O Earth, how like to Heaven, if not preferred
For what God, after better, worse would build?
Terrestrial Heaven, danced round by other Heavens
That shine, yet bear their bright officious lamps,
Light above light, for thee alone, as seems,
In thee concentring all their precious beams
Of sacred influence! As God in Heaven
Is center, yet extends to all; so thou,
Centring, receivest from all those orbs: in thee,
Not in themselves, all their known virtue appears
Productive in herb, plant, and nobler birth
Of creatures animate with gradual life
Of growth, sense, reason, all summed up in Man.
With what delight could I have walked thee round,
If I could joy in aught, sweet interchange
Of hill, and valley, rivers, woods, and plains,
Now land, now sea and shores with forest crowned,
Rocks, dens, and caves! But I in none of these
Find place or refuge; and the more I see
Pleasures about me, so much more I feel
Torment within me, as from the hateful siege
Of contraries: all good to me becomes
Bane, and in Heaven much worse would be my state.
But neither here seek I, no nor in Heaven
To dwell, unless by mastering Heaven’s Supreme;
Nor hope to be myself less miserable
By what I seek, but others to make such
As I, though thereby worse to me redound:
For only in destroying I find ease
To my relentless thoughts; and, him destroyed,
Or won to what may work his utter loss,
For whom all this was made, all this will soon
Follow, as to him linked in weal or woe;
In woe then; that destruction wide may range:
To me shall be the glory sole among
The infernal Powers, in one day to have marred
What he, Almighty styled, six nights and days
Continued making; and who knows how long
Before had been contriving? though perhaps
Not longer than since I, in one night, freed
From servitude inglorious well nigh half
The angelick name, and thinner left the throng
Of his adorers: He, to be avenged,
And to repair his numbers thus impaired,
Whether such virtue spent of old now failed
More Angels to create, if they at least
Are his created, or, to spite us more,
Determined to advance into our room
A creature formed of earth, and him endow,
Exalted from so base original,
With heavenly spoils, our spoils: What he decreed,
He effected; Man he made, and for him built
Magnificent this world, and earth his seat,
Him lord pronounced; and, O indignity!
Subjected to his service angel-wings,
And flaming ministers to watch and tend
Their earthly charge: Of these the vigilance
I dread; and, to elude, thus wrapt in mist
Of midnight vapour glide obscure, and pry
In every bush and brake, where hap may find
The serpent sleeping; in whose mazy folds
To hide me, and the dark intent I bring.
O foul descent! that I, who erst contended
With Gods to sit the highest, am now constrained
Into a beast; and, mixed with bestial slime,
This essence to incarnate and imbrute,
That to the highth of Deity aspired!
But what will not ambition and revenge
Descend to? Who aspires, must down as low
As high he soared; obnoxious, first or last,
To basest things. Revenge, at first though sweet,
Bitter ere long, back on itself recoils:
Let it; I reck not, so it light well aimed,
Since higher I fall short, on him who next
Provokes my envy, this new favourite
Of Heaven, this man of clay, son of despite,
Whom, us the more to spite, his Maker raised
From dust: Spite then with spite is best repaid.
So saying, through each thicket dank or dry,
Like a black mist low-creeping, he held on
His midnight-search, where soonest he might find
The serpent; him fast-sleeping soon he found
In labyrinth of many a round self-rolled,
His head the midst, well stored with subtile wiles:
Not yet in horrid shade or dismal den,
Nor nocent yet; but, on the grassy herb,
Fearless unfeared he slept: in at his mouth
The Devil entered; and his brutal sense,
In heart or head, possessing, soon inspired
With act intelligential; but his sleep
Disturbed not, waiting close the approach of morn.
Now, when as sacred light began to dawn
In Eden on the humid flowers, that breathed
Their morning incense, when all things, that breathe,
From the Earth’s great altar send up silent praise
To the Creator, and his nostrils fill
With grateful smell, forth came the human pair,
And joined their vocal worship to the quire
Of creatures wanting voice; that done, partake
The season prime for sweetest scents and airs:
Then commune, how that day they best may ply
Their growing work: for much their work out-grew
The hands’ dispatch of two gardening so wide,
And Eve first to her husband thus began.
Adam, well may we labour still to dress
This garden, still to tend plant, herb, and flower,
Our pleasant task enjoined; but, till more hands
Aid us, the work under our labour grows,
Luxurious by restraint; what we by day
Lop overgrown, or prune, or prop, or bind,
One night or two with wanton growth derides
Tending to wild. Thou therefore now advise,
Or bear what to my mind first thoughts present:
Let us divide our labours; thou, where choice
Leads thee, or where most needs, whether to wind
The woodbine round this arbour, or direct
The clasping ivy where to climb; while I,
In yonder spring of roses intermixed
With myrtle, find what to redress till noon:
For, while so near each other thus all day
Our task we choose, what wonder if so near
Looks intervene and smiles, or object new
Casual discourse draw on; which intermits
Our day’s work, brought to little, though begun
Early, and the hour of supper comes unearned?
To whom mild answer Adam thus returned.
Sole Eve, associate sole, to me beyond
Compare above all living creatures dear!
Well hast thou motioned, well thy thoughts employed,
How we might best fulfil the work which here
God hath assigned us; nor of me shalt pass
Unpraised: for nothing lovelier can be found
In woman, than to study houshold good,
And good works in her husband to promote.
Yet not so strictly hath our Lord imposed
Labour, as to debar us when we need
Refreshment, whether food, or talk between,
Food of the mind, or this sweet intercourse
Of looks and smiles; for smiles from reason flow,
To brute denied, and are of love the food;
Love, not the lowest end of human life.
For not to irksome toil, but to delight,
He made us, and delight to reason joined.
These paths and bowers doubt not but our joint hands
Will keep from wilderness with ease, as wide
As we need walk, till younger hands ere long
Assist us; But, if much converse perhaps
Thee satiate, to short absence I could yield:
For solitude sometimes is best society,
And short retirement urges sweet return.
But other doubt possesses me, lest harm
Befall thee severed from me; for thou knowest
What hath been warned us, what malicious foe
Envying our happiness, and of his own
Despairing, seeks to work us woe and shame
By sly assault; and somewhere nigh at hand
Watches, no doubt, with greedy hope to find
His wish and best advantage, us asunder;
Hopeless to circumvent us joined, where each
To other speedy aid might lend at need:
Whether his first design be to withdraw
Our fealty from God, or to disturb
Conjugal love, than which perhaps no bliss
Enjoyed by us excites his envy more;
Or this, or worse, leave not the faithful side
That gave thee being, still shades thee, and protects.
The wife, where danger or dishonour lurks,
Safest and seemliest by her husband stays,
Who guards her, or with her the worst endures.
To whom the virgin majesty of Eve,
As one who loves, and some unkindness meets,
With sweet austere composure thus replied.
Offspring of Heaven and Earth, and all Earth’s Lord!
That such an enemy we have, who seeks
Our ruin, both by thee informed I learn,
And from the parting Angel over-heard,
As in a shady nook I stood behind,
Just then returned at shut of evening flowers.
But, that thou shouldst my firmness therefore doubt
To God or thee, because we have a foe
May tempt it, I expected not to hear.
His violence thou fearest not, being such
As we, not capable of death or pain,
Can either not receive, or can repel.
His fraud is then thy fear; which plain infers
Thy equal fear, that my firm faith and love
Can by his fraud be shaken or seduced;
Thoughts, which how found they harbour in thy breast,
Adam, mis-thought of her to thee so dear?
To whom with healing words Adam replied.
Daughter of God and Man, immortal Eve!
For such thou art; from sin and blame entire:
Not diffident of thee do I dissuade
Thy absence from my sight, but to avoid
The attempt itself, intended by our foe.
For he who tempts, though in vain, at least asperses
The tempted with dishonour foul; supposed
Not incorruptible of faith, not proof
Against temptation: Thou thyself with scorn
And anger wouldst resent the offered wrong,
Though ineffectual found: misdeem not then,
If such affront I labour to avert
From thee alone, which on us both at once
The enemy, though bold, will hardly dare;
Or daring, first on me the assault shall light.
Nor thou his malice and false guile contemn;
Subtle he needs must be, who could seduce
Angels; nor think superfluous other’s aid.
I, from the influence of thy looks, receive
Access in every virtue; in thy sight
More wise, more watchful, stronger, if need were
Of outward strength; while shame, thou looking on,
Shame to be overcome or over-reached,
Would utmost vigour raise, and raised unite.
Why shouldst not thou like sense within thee feel
When I am present, and thy trial choose
With me, best witness of thy virtue tried?
So spake domestick Adam in his care
And matrimonial love; but Eve, who thought
Less attributed to her faith sincere,
Thus her reply with accent sweet renewed.
If this be our condition, thus to dwell
In narrow circuit straitened by a foe,
Subtle or violent, we not endued
Single with like defence, wherever met;
How are we happy, still in fear of harm?
But harm precedes not sin: only our foe,
Tempting, affronts us with his foul esteem
Of our integrity: his foul esteem
Sticks no dishonour on our front, but turns
Foul on himself; then wherefore shunned or feared
By us? who rather double honour gain
From his surmise proved false; find peace within,
Favour from Heaven, our witness, from the event.
And what is faith, love, virtue, unassayed
Alone, without exteriour help sustained?
Let us not then suspect our happy state
Left so imperfect by the Maker wise,
As not secure to single or combined.
Frail is our happiness, if this be so,
And Eden were no Eden, thus exposed.
To whom thus Adam fervently replied.
O Woman, best are all things as the will
Of God ordained them: His creating hand
Nothing imperfect or deficient left
Of all that he created, much less Man,
Or aught that might his happy state secure,
Secure from outward force; within himself
The danger lies, yet lies within his power:
Against his will he can receive no harm.
But God left free the will; for what obeys
Reason, is free; and Reason he made right,
But bid her well be ware, and still erect;
Lest, by some fair-appearing good surprised,
She dictate false; and mis-inform the will
To do what God expressly hath forbid.
Not then mistrust, but tender love, enjoins,
That I should mind thee oft; and mind thou me.
Firm we subsist, yet possible to swerve;
Since Reason not impossibly may meet
Some specious object by the foe suborned,
And fall into deception unaware,
Not keeping strictest watch, as she was warned.
Seek not temptation then, which to avoid
Were better, and most likely if from me
Thou sever not: Trial will come unsought.
Wouldst thou approve thy constancy, approve
First thy obedience; the other who can know,
Not seeing thee attempted, who attest?
But, if thou think, trial unsought may find
Us both securer than thus warned thou seemest,
Go; for thy stay, not free, absents thee more;
Go in thy native innocence, rely
On what thou hast of virtue; summon all!
For God towards thee hath done his part, do thine.
So spake the patriarch of mankind; but Eve
Persisted; yet submiss, though last, replied.
With thy permission then, and thus forewarned
Chiefly by what thy own last reasoning words
Touched only; that our trial, when least sought,
May find us both perhaps far less prepared,
The willinger I go, nor much expect
A foe so proud will first the weaker seek;
So bent, the more shall shame him his repulse.
Thus saying, from her husband’s hand her hand
Soft she withdrew; and, like a Wood-Nymph light,
Oread or Dryad, or of Delia’s train,
Betook her to the groves; but Delia’s self
In gait surpassed, and Goddess-like deport,
Though not as she with bow and quiver armed,
But with such gardening tools as Art yet rude,
Guiltless of fire, had formed, or Angels brought.
To Pales, or Pomona, thus adorned,
Likest she seemed, Pomona when she fled
Vertumnus, or to Ceres in her prime,
Yet virgin of Proserpina from Jove.
Her long with ardent look his eye pursued
Delighted, but desiring more her stay.
Oft he to her his charge of quick return
Repeated; she to him as oft engaged
To be returned by noon amid the bower,
And all things in best order to invite
Noontide repast, or afternoon’s repose.
O much deceived, much failing, hapless Eve,
Of thy presumed return! event perverse!
Thou never from that hour in Paradise
Foundst either sweet repast, or sound repose;
Such ambush, hid among sweet flowers and shades,
Waited with hellish rancour imminent
To intercept thy way, or send thee back
Despoiled of innocence, of faith, of bliss!
For now, and since first break of dawn, the Fiend,
Mere serpent in appearance, forth was come;
And on his quest, where likeliest he might find
The only two of mankind, but in them
The whole included race, his purposed prey.
In bower and field he sought, where any tuft
Of grove or garden-plot more pleasant lay,
Their tendance, or plantation for delight;
By fountain or by shady rivulet
He sought them both, but wished his hap might find
Eve separate; he wished, but not with hope
Of what so seldom chanced; when to his wish,
Beyond his hope, Eve separate he spies,
Veiled in a cloud of fragrance, where she stood,
Half spied, so thick the roses blushing round
About her glowed, oft stooping to support
Each flower of slender stalk, whose head, though gay
Carnation, purple, azure, or specked with gold,
Hung drooping unsustained; them she upstays
Gently with myrtle band, mindless the while
Herself, though fairest unsupported flower,
From her best prop so far, and storm so nigh.
Nearer he drew, and many a walk traversed
Of stateliest covert, cedar, pine, or palm;
Then voluble and bold, now hid, now seen,
Among thick-woven arborets, and flowers
Imbordered on each bank, the hand of Eve:
Spot more delicious than those gardens feigned
Or of revived Adonis, or renowned
Alcinous, host of old Laertes’ son;
Or that, not mystick, where the sapient king
Held dalliance with his fair Egyptian spouse.
Much he the place admired, the person more.
As one who long in populous city pent,
Where houses thick and sewers annoy the air,
Forth issuing on a summer’s morn, to breathe
Among the pleasant villages and farms
Adjoined, from each thing met conceives delight;
The smell of grain, or tedded grass, or kine,
Or dairy, each rural sight, each rural sound;
If chance, with nymph-like step, fair virgin pass,
What pleasing seemed, for her now pleases more;
She most, and in her look sums all delight:
Such pleasure took the Serpent to behold
This flowery plat, the sweet recess of Eve
Thus early, thus alone: Her heavenly form
Angelick, but more soft, and feminine,
Her graceful innocence, her every air
Of gesture, or least action, overawed
His malice, and with rapine sweet bereaved
His fierceness of the fierce intent it brought:
That space the Evil-one abstracted stood
From his own evil, and for the time remained
Stupidly good; of enmity disarmed,
Of guile, of hate, of envy, of revenge:
But the hot Hell that always in him burns,
Though in mid Heaven, soon ended his delight,
And tortures him now more, the more he sees
Of pleasure, not for him ordained: then soon
Fierce hate he recollects, and all his thoughts
Of mischief, gratulating, thus excites.
Thoughts, whither have ye led me! with what sweet
Compulsion thus transported, to forget
What hither brought us! hate, not love; nor hope
Of Paradise for Hell, hope here to taste
Of pleasure; but all pleasure to destroy,
Save what is in destroying; other joy
To me is lost. Then, let me not let pass
Occasion which now smiles; behold alone
The woman, opportune to all attempts,
Her husband, for I view far round, not nigh,
Whose higher intellectual more I shun,
And strength, of courage haughty, and of limb
Heroick built, though of terrestrial mould;
Foe not informidable! exempt from wound,
I not; so much hath Hell debased, and pain
Enfeebled me, to what I was in Heaven.
She fair, divinely fair, fit love for Gods!
Not terrible, though terrour be in love
And beauty, not approached by stronger hate,
Hate stronger, under show of love well feigned;
The way which to her ruin now I tend.
So spake the enemy of mankind, enclosed
In serpent, inmate bad! and toward Eve
Addressed his way: not with indented wave,
Prone on the ground, as since; but on his rear,
Circular base of rising folds, that towered
Fold above fold, a surging maze! his head
Crested aloft, and carbuncle his eyes;
With burnished neck of verdant gold, erect
Amidst his circling spires, that on the grass
Floated redundant: pleasing was his shape
And lovely; never since of serpent-kind
Lovelier, not those that in Illyria changed,
Hermione and Cadmus, or the god
In Epidaurus; nor to which transformed
Ammonian Jove, or Capitoline, was seen;
He with Olympias; this with her who bore
Scipio, the highth of Rome. With tract oblique
At first, as one who sought access, but feared
To interrupt, side-long he works his way.
As when a ship, by skilful steersmen wrought
Nigh river’s mouth or foreland, where the wind
Veers oft, as oft so steers, and shifts her sail:
So varied he, and of his tortuous train
Curled many a wanton wreath in sight of Eve,
To lure her eye; she, busied, heard the sound
Of rusling leaves, but minded not, as used
To such disport before her through the field,
From every beast; more duteous at her call,
Than at Circean call the herd disguised.
He, bolder now, uncalled before her stood,
But as in gaze admiring: oft he bowed
His turret crest, and sleek enamelled neck,
Fawning; and licked the ground whereon she trod.
His gentle dumb expression turned at length
The eye of Eve to mark his play; he, glad
Of her attention gained, with serpent-tongue
Organick, or impulse of vocal air,
His fraudulent temptation thus began.
Wonder not, sovran Mistress, if perhaps
Thou canst, who art sole wonder! much less arm
Thy looks, the Heaven of mildness, with disdain,
Displeased that I approach thee thus, and gaze
Insatiate; I thus single; nor have feared
Thy awful brow, more awful thus retired.
Fairest resemblance of thy Maker fair,
Thee all things living gaze on, all things thine
By gift, and thy celestial beauty adore
With ravishment beheld! there best beheld,
Where universally admired; but here
In this enclosure wild, these beasts among,
Beholders rude, and shallow to discern
Half what in thee is fair, one man except,
Who sees thee? and what is one? who should be seen
A Goddess among Gods, adored and served
By Angels numberless, thy daily train.
So glozed the Tempter, and his proem tuned:
Into the heart of Eve his words made way,
Though at the voice much marvelling; at length,
Not unamazed, she thus in answer spake.
What may this mean? language of man pronounced
By tongue of brute, and human sense expressed?
The first, at least, of these I thought denied
To beasts; whom God, on their creation-day,
Created mute to all articulate sound:
The latter I demur; for in their looks
Much reason, and in their actions, oft appears.
Thee, Serpent, subtlest beast of all the field
I knew, but not with human voice endued;
Redouble then this miracle, and say,
How camest thou speakable of mute, and how
To me so friendly grown above the rest
Of brutal kind, that daily are in sight?
Say, for such wonder claims attention due.
To whom the guileful Tempter thus replied.
Empress of this fair world, resplendent Eve!
Easy to me it is to tell thee all
What thou commandest; and right thou shouldst be obeyed:
I was at first as other beasts that graze
The trodden herb, of abject thoughts and low,
As was my food; nor aught but food discerned
Or sex, and apprehended nothing high:
Till, on a day roving the field, I chanced
A goodly tree far distant to behold
Loaden with fruit of fairest colours mixed,
Ruddy and gold: I nearer drew to gaze;
When from the boughs a savoury odour blown,
Grateful to appetite, more pleased my sense
Than smell of sweetest fennel, or the teats
Of ewe or goat dropping with milk at even,
Unsucked of lamb or kid, that tend their play.
To satisfy the sharp desire I had
Of tasting those fair apples, I resolved
Not to defer; hunger and thirst at once,
Powerful persuaders, quickened at the scent
Of that alluring fruit, urged me so keen.
About the mossy trunk I wound me soon;
For, high from ground, the branches would require
Thy utmost reach or Adam’s: Round the tree
All other beasts that saw, with like desire
Longing and envying stood, but could not reach.
Amid the tree now got, where plenty hung
Tempting so nigh, to pluck and eat my fill
I spared not; for, such pleasure till that hour,
At feed or fountain, never had I found.
Sated at length, ere long I might perceive
Strange alteration in me, to degree
Of reason in my inward powers; and speech
Wanted not long; though to this shape retained.
Thenceforth to speculations high or deep
I turned my thoughts, and with capacious mind
Considered all things visible in Heaven,
Or Earth, or Middle; all things fair and good:
But all that fair and good in thy divine
Semblance, and in thy beauty’s heavenly ray,
United I beheld; no fair to thine
Equivalent or second! which compelled
Me thus, though importune perhaps, to come
And gaze, and worship thee of right declared
Sovran of creatures, universal Dame!
So talked the spirited sly Snake; and Eve,
Yet more amazed, unwary thus replied.
Serpent, thy overpraising leaves in doubt
The virtue of that fruit, in thee first proved:
But say, where grows the tree? from hence how far?
For many are the trees of God that grow
In Paradise, and various, yet unknown
To us; in such abundance lies our choice,
As leaves a greater store of fruit untouched,
Still hanging incorruptible, till men
Grow up to their provision, and more hands
Help to disburden Nature of her birth.
To whom the wily Adder, blithe and glad.
Empress, the way is ready, and not long;
Beyond a row of myrtles, on a flat,
Fast by a fountain, one small thicket past
Of blowing myrrh and balm: if thou accept
My conduct, I can bring thee thither soon
Lead then, said Eve. He, leading, swiftly rolled
In tangles, and made intricate seem straight,
To mischief swift. Hope elevates, and joy
Brightens his crest; as when a wandering fire,
Compact of unctuous vapour, which the night
Condenses, and the cold environs round,
Kindled through agitation to a flame,
Which oft, they say, some evil Spirit attends,
Hovering and blazing with delusive light,
Misleads the amazed night-wanderer from his way
To bogs and mires, and oft through pond or pool;
There swallowed up and lost, from succour far.
So glistered the dire Snake, and into fraud
Led Eve, our credulous mother, to the tree
Of prohibition, root of all our woe;
Which when she saw, thus to her guide she spake.
Serpent, we might have spared our coming hither,
Fruitless to me, though fruit be here to excess,
The credit of whose virtue rest with thee;
Wonderous indeed, if cause of such effects.
But of this tree we may not taste nor touch;
God so commanded, and left that command
Sole daughter of his voice; the rest, we live
Law to ourselves; our reason is our law.
To whom the Tempter guilefully replied.
Indeed! hath God then said that of the fruit
Of all these garden-trees ye shall not eat,
Yet Lords declared of all in earth or air?
To whom thus Eve, yet sinless. Of the fruit
Of each tree in the garden we may eat;
But of the fruit of this fair tree amidst
The garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat
Thereof, nor shall ye touch it, lest ye die.
She scarce had said, though brief, when now more bold
The Tempter, but with show of zeal and love
To Man, and indignation at his wrong,
New part puts on; and, as to passion moved,
Fluctuates disturbed, yet comely and in act
Raised, as of some great matter to begin.
As when of old some orator renowned,
In Athens or free Rome, where eloquence
Flourished, since mute! to some great cause addressed,
Stood in himself collected; while each part,
Motion, each act, won audience ere the tongue;
Sometimes in highth began, as no delay
Of preface brooking, through his zeal of right:
So standing, moving, or to highth up grown,
The Tempter, all impassioned, thus began.
O sacred, wise, and wisdom-giving Plant,
Mother of science! now I feel thy power
Within me clear; not only to discern
Things in their causes, but to trace the ways
Of highest agents, deemed however wise.
Queen of this universe! do not believe
Those rigid threats of death: ye shall not die:
How should you? by the fruit? it gives you life
To knowledge; by the threatener? look on me,
Me, who have touched and tasted; yet both live,
And life more perfect have attained than Fate
Meant me, by venturing higher than my lot.
Shall that be shut to Man, which to the Beast
Is open? or will God incense his ire
For such a petty trespass? and not praise
Rather your dauntless virtue, whom the pain
Of death denounced, whatever thing death be,
Deterred not from achieving what might lead
To happier life, knowledge of good and evil;
Of good, how just? of evil, if what is evil
Be real, why not known, since easier shunned?
God therefore cannot hurt ye, and be just;
Not just, not God; not feared then, nor obeyed:
Your fear itself of death removes the fear.
Why then was this forbid? Why, but to awe;
Why, but to keep ye low and ignorant,
His worshippers? He knows that in the day
Ye eat thereof, your eyes that seem so clear,
Yet are but dim, shall perfectly be then
Opened and cleared, and ye shall be as Gods,
Knowing both good and evil, as they know.
That ye shall be as Gods, since I as Man,
Internal Man, is but proportion meet;
I, of brute, human; ye, of human, Gods.
So ye shall die perhaps, by putting off
Human, to put on Gods; death to be wished,
Though threatened, which no worse than this can bring.
And what are Gods, that Man may not become
As they, participating God-like food?
The Gods are first, and that advantage use
On our belief, that all from them proceeds:
I question it; for this fair earth I see,
Warmed by the sun, producing every kind;
Them, nothing: if they all things, who enclosed
Knowledge of good and evil in this tree,
That whoso eats thereof, forthwith attains
Wisdom without their leave? and wherein lies
The offence, that Man should thus attain to know?
What can your knowledge hurt him, or this tree
Impart against his will, if all be his?
Or is it envy? and can envy dwell
In heavenly breasts? These, these, and many more
Causes import your need of this fair fruit.
Goddess humane, reach then, and freely taste!
He ended; and his words, replete with guile,
Into her heart too easy entrance won:
Fixed on the fruit she gazed, which to behold
Might tempt alone; and in her ears the sound
Yet rung of his persuasive words, impregned
With reason, to her seeming, and with truth:
Mean while the hour of noon drew on, and waked
An eager appetite, raised by the smell
So savoury of that fruit, which with desire,
Inclinable now grown to touch or taste,
Solicited her longing eye; yet first
Pausing a while, thus to herself she mused.
Great are thy virtues, doubtless, best of fruits,
Though kept from man, and worthy to be admired;
Whose taste, too long forborn, at first assay
Gave elocution to the mute, and taught
The tongue not made for speech to speak thy praise:
Thy praise he also, who forbids thy use,
Conceals not from us, naming thee the tree
Of knowledge, knowledge both of good and evil;
Forbids us then to taste! but his forbidding
Commends thee more, while it infers the good
By thee communicated, and our want:
For good unknown sure is not had; or, had
And yet unknown, is as not had at all.
In plain then, what forbids he but to know,
Forbids us good, forbids us to be wise?
Such prohibitions bind not. But, if death
Bind us with after-bands, what profits then
Our inward freedom? In the day we eat
Of this fair fruit, our doom is, we shall die!
How dies the Serpent? he hath eaten and lives,
And knows, and speaks, and reasons, and discerns,
Irrational till then. For us alone
Was death invented? or to us denied
This intellectual food, for beasts reserved?
For beasts it seems: yet that one beast which first
Hath tasted envies not, but brings with joy
The good befallen him, author unsuspect,
Friendly to man, far from deceit or guile.
What fear I then? rather, what know to fear
Under this ignorance of good and evil,
Of God or death, of law or penalty?
Here grows the cure of all, this fruit divine,
Fair to the eye, inviting to the taste,
Of virtue to make wise: What hinders then
To reach, and feed at once both body and mind?
So saying, her rash hand in evil hour
Forth reaching to the fruit, she plucked, she eat!
Earth felt the wound; and Nature from her seat,
Sighing through all her works, gave signs of woe,
That all was lost. Back to the thicket slunk
The guilty Serpent; and well might; for Eve,
Intent now wholly on her taste, nought else
Regarded; such delight till then, as seemed,
In fruit she never tasted, whether true
Or fancied so, through expectation high
Of knowledge; not was Godhead from her thought.
Greedily she ingorged without restraint,
And knew not eating death: Satiate at length,
And hightened as with wine, jocund and boon,
Thus to herself she pleasingly began.
O sovran, virtuous, precious of all trees
In Paradise! of operation blest
To sapience, hitherto obscured, infamed.
And thy fair fruit let hang, as to no end
Created; but henceforth my early care,
Not without song, each morning, and due praise,
Shall tend thee, and the fertile burden ease
Of thy full branches offered free to all;
Till, dieted by thee, I grow mature
In knowledge, as the Gods, who all things know;
Though others envy what they cannot give:
For, had the gift been theirs, it had not here
Thus grown. Experience, next, to thee I owe,
Best guide; not following thee, I had remained
In ignorance; thou openest wisdom’s way,
And givest access, though secret she retire.
And I perhaps am secret: Heaven is high,
High, and remote to see from thence distinct
Each thing on Earth; and other care perhaps
May have diverted from continual watch
Our great Forbidder, safe with all his spies
About him. But to Adam in what sort
Shall I appear? shall I to him make known
As yet my change, and give him to partake
Full happiness with me, or rather not,
But keeps the odds of knowledge in my power
Without copartner? so to add what wants
In female sex, the more to draw his love,
And render me more equal; and perhaps,
A thing not undesirable, sometime
Superiour; for, inferiour, who is free
This may be well: But what if God have seen,
And death ensue? then I shall be no more!
And Adam, wedded to another Eve,
Shall live with her enjoying, I extinct;
A death to think! Confirmed then I resolve,
Adam shall share with me in bliss or woe:
So dear I love him, that with him all deaths
I could endure, without him live no life.
So saying, from the tree her step she turned;
But first low reverence done, as to the Power
That dwelt within, whose presence had infused
Into the plant sciential sap, derived
From nectar, drink of Gods. Adam the while,
Waiting desirous her return, had wove
Of choicest flowers a garland, to adorn
Her tresses, and her rural labours crown;
As reapers oft are wont their harvest-queen.
Great joy he promised to his thoughts, and new
Solace in her return, so long delayed:
Yet oft his heart, divine of something ill,
Misgave him; he the faltering measure felt;
And forth to meet her went, the way she took
That morn when first they parted: by the tree
Of knowledge he must pass; there he her met,
Scarce from the tree returning; in her hand
A bough of fairest fruit, that downy smiled,
New gathered, and ambrosial smell diffused.
To him she hasted; in her face excuse
Came prologue, and apology too prompt;
Which, with bland words at will, she thus addressed.
Hast thou not wondered, Adam, at my stay?
Thee I have missed, and thought it long, deprived
Thy presence; agony of love till now
Not felt, nor shall be twice; for never more
Mean I to try, what rash untried I sought,
The pain of absence from thy sight. But strange
Hath been the cause, and wonderful to hear:
This tree is not, as we are told, a tree
Of danger tasted, nor to evil unknown
Opening the way, but of divine effect
To open eyes, and make them Gods who taste;
And hath been tasted such: The serpent wise,
Or not restrained as we, or not obeying,
Hath eaten of the fruit; and is become,
Not dead, as we are threatened, but thenceforth
Endued with human voice and human sense,
Reasoning to admiration; and with me
Persuasively hath so prevailed, that I
Have also tasted, and have also found
The effects to correspond; opener mine eyes,
Dim erst, dilated spirits, ampler heart,
And growing up to Godhead; which for thee
Chiefly I sought, without thee can despise.
For bliss, as thou hast part, to me is bliss;
Tedious, unshared with thee, and odious soon.
Thou therefore also taste, that equal lot
May join us, equal joy, as equal love;
Lest, thou not tasting, different degree
Disjoin us, and I then too late renounce
Deity for thee, when Fate will not permit.
Thus Eve with countenance blithe her story told;
But in her cheek distemper flushing glowed.
On the other side Adam, soon as he heard
The fatal trespass done by Eve, amazed,
Astonied stood and blank, while horrour chill
Ran through his veins, and all his joints relaxed;
From his slack hand the garland wreathed for Eve
Down dropt, and all the faded roses shed:
Speechless he stood and pale, till thus at length
First to himself he inward silence broke.
O fairest of Creation, last and best
Of all God’s works, Creature in whom excelled
Whatever can to sight or thought be formed,
Holy, divine, good, amiable, or sweet!
How art thou lost! how on a sudden lost,
Defaced, deflowered, and now to death devote!
Rather, how hast thou yielded to transgress
The strict forbiddance, how to violate
The sacred fruit forbidden! Some cursed fraud
Of enemy hath beguiled thee, yet unknown,
And me with thee hath ruined; for with thee
Certain my resolution is to die:
How can I live without thee! how forego
Thy sweet converse, and love so dearly joined,
To live again in these wild woods forlorn!
Should God create another Eve, and I
Another rib afford, yet loss of thee
Would never from my heart: no, no! I feel
The link of Nature draw me: flesh of flesh,
Bone of my bone thou art, and from thy state
Mine never shall be parted, bliss or woe.
So having said, as one from sad dismay
Recomforted, and after thoughts disturbed
Submitting to what seemed remediless,
Thus in calm mood his words to Eve he turned.
Bold deed thou hast presumed, adventurous Eve,
And peril great provoked, who thus hast dared,
Had it been only coveting to eye
That sacred fruit, sacred to abstinence,
Much more to taste it under ban to touch.
But past who can recall, or done undo?
Not God Omnipotent, nor Fate; yet so
Perhaps thou shalt not die, perhaps the fact
Is not so heinous now, foretasted fruit,
Profaned first by the serpent, by him first
Made common, and unhallowed, ere our taste;
Nor yet on him found deadly; yet he lives;
Lives, as thou saidst, and gains to live, as Man,
Higher degree of life; inducement strong
To us, as likely tasting to attain
Proportional ascent; which cannot be
But to be Gods, or Angels, demi-Gods.
Nor can I think that God, Creator wise,
Though threatening, will in earnest so destroy
Us his prime creatures, dignified so high,
Set over all his works; which in our fall,
For us created, needs with us must fail,
Dependant made; so God shall uncreate,
Be frustrate, do, undo, and labour lose;
Not well conceived of God, who, though his power
Creation could repeat, yet would be loth
Us to abolish, lest the Adversary
Triumph, and say; “Fickle their state whom God
Most favours; who can please him long? Me first
He ruined, now Mankind; whom will he next?”
Matter of scorn, not to be given the Foe.
However I with thee have fixed my lot,
Certain to undergo like doom: If death
Consort with thee, death is to me as life;
So forcible within my heart I feel
The bond of Nature draw me to my own;
My own in thee, for what thou art is mine;
Our state cannot be severed; we are one,
One flesh; to lose thee were to lose myself.
So Adam; and thus Eve to him replied.
O glorious trial of exceeding love,
Illustrious evidence, example high!
Engaging me to emulate; but, short
Of thy perfection, how shall I attain,
Adam, from whose dear side I boast me sprung,
And gladly of our union hear thee speak,
One heart, one soul in both; whereof good proof
This day affords, declaring thee resolved,
Rather than death, or aught than death more dread,
Shall separate us, linked in love so dear,
To undergo with me one guilt, one crime,
If any be, of tasting this fair fruit;
Whose virtue for of good still good proceeds,
Direct, or by occasion, hath presented
This happy trial of thy love, which else
So eminently never had been known?
Were it I thought death menaced would ensue
This my attempt, I would sustain alone
The worst, and not persuade thee, rather die
Deserted, than oblige thee with a fact
Pernicious to thy peace; chiefly assured
Remarkably so late of thy so true,
So faithful, love unequalled: but I feel
Far otherwise the event; not death, but life
Augmented, opened eyes, new hopes, new joys,
Taste so divine, that what of sweet before
Hath touched my sense, flat seems to this, and harsh.
On my experience, Adam, freely taste,
And fear of death deliver to the winds.
So saying, she embraced him, and for joy
Tenderly wept; much won, that he his love
Had so ennobled, as of choice to incur
Divine displeasure for her sake, or death.
In recompence (for such compliance bad
Such recompence best merits) from the bough
She gave him of that fair enticing fruit
With liberal hand: he scrupled not to eat,
Against his better knowledge; not deceived,
But fondly overcome with female charm.
Earth trembled from her entrails, as again
In pangs; and Nature gave a second groan;
Sky loured; and, muttering thunder, some sad drops
Wept at completing of the mortal sin
Original: while Adam took no thought,
Eating his fill; nor Eve to iterate
Her former trespass feared, the more to sooth
Him with her loved society; that now,
As with new wine intoxicated both,
They swim in mirth, and fancy that they feel
Divinity within them breeding wings,
Wherewith to scorn the earth: But that false fruit
Far other operation first displayed,
Carnal desire inflaming; he on Eve
Began to cast lascivious eyes; she him
As wantonly repaid; in lust they burn:
Till Adam thus ’gan Eve to dalliance move.
Eve, now I see thou art exact of taste,
And elegant, of sapience no small part;
Since to each meaning savour we apply,
And palate call judicious; I the praise
Yield thee, so well this day thou hast purveyed.
Much pleasure we have lost, while we abstained
From this delightful fruit, nor known till now
True relish, tasting; if such pleasure be
In things to us forbidden, it might be wished,
For this one tree had been forbidden ten.
But come, so well refreshed, now let us play,
As meet is, after such delicious fare;
For never did thy beauty, since the day
I saw thee first and wedded thee, adorned
With all perfections, so inflame my sense
With ardour to enjoy thee, fairer now
Than ever; bounty of this virtuous tree!
So said he, and forbore not glance or toy
Of amorous intent; well understood
Of Eve, whose eye darted contagious fire.
Her hand he seised; and to a shady bank,
Thick over-head with verdant roof imbowered,
He led her nothing loth; flowers were the couch,
Pansies, and violets, and asphodel,
And hyacinth; Earth’s freshest softest lap.
There they their fill of love and love’s disport
Took largely, of their mutual guilt the seal,
The solace of their sin; till dewy sleep
Oppressed them, wearied with their amorous play,
Soon as the force of that fallacious fruit,
That with exhilarating vapour bland
About their spirits had played, and inmost powers
Made err, was now exhaled; and grosser sleep,
Bred of unkindly fumes, with conscious dreams
Incumbered, now had left them; up they rose
As from unrest; and, each the other viewing,
Soon found their eyes how opened, and their minds
How darkened; innocence, that as a veil
Had shadowed them from knowing ill, was gone;
Just confidence, and native righteousness,
And honour, from about them, naked left
To guilty Shame; he covered, but his robe
Uncovered more. So rose the Danite strong,
Herculean Samson, from the harlot-lap
Of Philistean Dalilah, and waked
Shorn of his strength. They destitute and bare
Of all their virtue: Silent, and in face
Confounded, long they sat, as strucken mute:
Till Adam, though not less than Eve abashed,
At length gave utterance to these words constrained.
O Eve, in evil hour thou didst give ear
To that false worm, of whomsoever taught
To counterfeit Man’s voice; true in our fall,
False in our promised rising; since our eyes
Opened we find indeed, and find we know
Both good and evil; good lost, and evil got;
Bad fruit of knowledge, if this be to know;
Which leaves us naked thus, of honour void,
Of innocence, of faith, of purity,
Our wonted ornaments now soiled and stained,
And in our faces evident the signs
Of foul concupiscence; whence evil store;
Even shame, the last of evils; of the first
Be sure then.—How shall I behold the face
Henceforth of God or Angel, erst with joy
And rapture so oft beheld? Those heavenly shapes
Will dazzle now this earthly with their blaze
Insufferably bright. O! might I here
In solitude live savage; in some glade
Obscured, where highest woods, impenetrable
To star or sun-light, spread their umbrage broad
And brown as evening: Cover me, ye Pines!
Ye Cedars, with innumerable boughs
Hide me, where I may never see them more!—
But let us now, as in bad plight, devise
What best may for the present serve to hide
The parts of each from other, that seem most
To shame obnoxious, and unseemliest seen;
Some tree, whose broad smooth leaves together sewed,
And girded on our loins, may cover round
Those middle parts; that this new comer, Shame,
There sit not, and reproach us as unclean.
So counselled he, and both together went
Into the thickest wood; there soon they chose
The fig-tree; not that kind for fruit renowned,
But such as at this day, to Indians known,
In Malabar or Decan spreads her arms
Branching so broad and long, that in the ground
The bended twigs take root, and daughters grow
About the mother tree, a pillared shade
High over-arched, and echoing walks between:
There oft the Indian herdsman, shunning heat,
Shelters in cool, and tends his pasturing herds
At loop-holes cut through thickest shade: Those leaves
They gathered, broad as Amazonian targe;
And, with what skill they had, together sewed,
To gird their waist; vain covering, if to hide
Their guilt and dreaded shame! O, how unlike
To that first naked glory! Such of late
Columbus found the American, so girt
With feathered cincture; naked else, and wild
Among the trees on isles and woody shores.
Thus fenced, and, as they thought, their shame in part
Covered, but not at rest or ease of mind,
They sat them down to weep; nor only tears
Rained at their eyes, but high winds worse within
Began to rise, high passions, anger, hate,
Mistrust, suspicion, discord; and shook sore
Their inward state of mind, calm region once
And full of peace, now tost and turbulent:
For Understanding ruled not, and the Will
Heard not her lore; both in subjection now
To sensual Appetite, who from beneath
Usurping over sovran Reason claimed
Superiour sway: From thus distempered breast,
Adam, estranged in look and altered style,
Speech intermitted thus to Eve renewed.
Would thou hadst hearkened to my words, and staid
With me, as I besought thee, when that strange
Desire of wandering, this unhappy morn,
I know not whence possessed thee; we had then
Remained still happy; not, as now, despoiled
Of all our good; shamed, naked, miserable!
Let none henceforth seek needless cause to approve
The faith they owe; when earnestly they seek
Such proof, conclude, they then begin to fail.
To whom, soon moved with touch of blame, thus Eve.
What words have passed thy lips, Adam severe!
Imputest thou that to my default, or will
Of wandering, as thou callest it, which who knows
But might as ill have happened thou being by,
Or to thyself perhaps? Hadst thou been there,
Or here the attempt, thou couldst not have discerned
Fraud in the Serpent, speaking as he spake;
No ground of enmity between us known,
Why he should mean me ill, or seek to harm.
Was I to have never parted from thy side?
As good have grown there still a lifeless rib.
Being as I am, why didst not thou, the head,
Command me absolutely not to go,
Going into such danger, as thou saidst?
Too facile then, thou didst not much gainsay;
Nay, didst permit, approve, and fair dismiss.
Hadst thou been firm and fixed in thy dissent,
Neither had I transgressed, nor thou with me.
To whom, then first incensed, Adam replied.
Is this the love, is this the recompence
Of mine to thee, ingrateful Eve! expressed
Immutable, when thou wert lost, not I;
Who might have lived, and joyed immortal bliss,
Yet willingly chose rather death with thee?
And am I now upbraided as the cause
Of thy transgressing? Not enough severe,
It seems, in thy restraint: What could I more
I warned thee, I admonished thee, foretold
The danger, and the lurking enemy
That lay in wait; beyond this, had been force;
And force upon free will hath here no place.
But confidence then bore thee on; secure
Either to meet no danger, or to find
Matter of glorious trial; and perhaps
I also erred, in overmuch admiring
What seemed in thee so perfect, that I thought
No evil durst attempt thee; but I rue
The errour now, which is become my crime,
And thou the accuser. Thus it shall befall
Him, who, to worth in women overtrusting,
Lets her will rule: restraint she will not brook;
And, left to herself, if evil thence ensue,
She first his weak indulgence will accuse.
Thus they in mutual accusation spent
The fruitless hours, but neither self-condemning;
And of their vain contest appeared no end.







Mean while the heinous and despiteful act
Of Satan, done in Paradise; and how
He, in the serpent, had perverted Eve,
Her husband she, to taste the fatal fruit,
Was known in Heaven; for what can ’scape the eye
Of God all-seeing, or deceive his heart
Omniscient? who, in all things wise and just,
Hindered not Satan to attempt the mind
Of Man, with strength entire and free will armed,
Complete to have discovered and repulsed
Whatever wiles of foe or seeming friend.
For still they knew, and ought to have still remembered,
The high injunction, not to taste that fruit,
Whoever tempted; which they not obeying,
(Incurred what could they less?) the penalty;
And, manifold in sin, deserved to fall.
Up into Heaven from Paradise in haste
The angelick guards ascended, mute, and sad,
For Man; for of his state by this they knew,
Much wondering how the subtle Fiend had stolen
Entrance unseen. Soon as the unwelcome news
From Earth arrived at Heaven-gate, displeased
All were who heard; dim sadness did not spare
That time celestial visages, yet, mixed
With pity, violated not their bliss.
About the new-arrived, in multitudes
The ethereal people ran, to hear and know
How all befel: They towards the throne supreme,
Accountable, made haste, to make appear,
With righteous plea, their utmost vigilance
And easily approved; when the Most High
Eternal Father, from his secret cloud,
Amidst in thunder uttered thus his voice.
Assembled Angels, and ye Powers returned
From unsuccessful charge; be not dismayed,
Nor troubled at these tidings from the earth,
Which your sincerest care could not prevent;
Foretold so lately what would come to pass,
When first this tempter crossed the gulf from Hell.
I told ye then he should prevail, and speed
On his bad errand; Man should be seduced,
And flattered out of all, believing lies
Against his Maker; no decree of mine
Concurring to necessitate his fall,
Or touch with lightest moment of impulse
His free will, to her own inclining left
In even scale. But fallen he is; and now
What rests, but that the mortal sentence pass
On his transgression,—death denounced that day?
Which he presumes already vain and void,
Because not yet inflicted, as he feared,
By some immediate stroke; but soon shall find
Forbearance no acquittance, ere day end.
Justice shall not return as bounty scorned.
But whom send I to judge them? whom but thee,
Vicegerent Son? To thee I have transferred
All judgement, whether in Heaven, or Earth, or Hell.
Easy it may be seen that I intend
Mercy colleague with justice, sending thee
Man’s friend, his Mediator, his designed
Both ransom and Redeemer voluntary,
And destined Man himself to judge Man fallen.
So spake the Father; and, unfolding bright
Toward the right hand his glory, on the Son
Blazed forth unclouded Deity: He full
Resplendent all his Father manifest
Expressed, and thus divinely answered mild.
Father Eternal, thine is to decree;
Mine, both in Heaven and Earth, to do thy will
Supreme; that thou in me, thy Son beloved,
Mayest ever rest well pleased. I go to judge
On earth these thy transgressours; but thou knowest,
Whoever judged, the worst on me must light,
When time shall be; for so I undertook
Before thee; and, not repenting, this obtain
Of right, that I may mitigate their doom
On me derived; yet I shall temper so
Justice with mercy, as may illustrate most
Them fully satisfied, and thee appease.
Attendance none shall need, nor train, where none
Are to behold the judgement, but the judged,
Those two; the third best absent is condemned,
Convict by flight, and rebel to all law:
Conviction to the serpent none belongs.
Thus saying, from his radiant seat he rose
Of high collateral glory: Him Thrones, and Powers,
Princedoms, and Dominations ministrant,
Accompanied to Heaven-gate; from whence
Eden, and all the coast, in prospect lay.
Down he descended straight; the speed of Gods
Time counts not, though with swiftest minutes winged.
Now was the sun in western cadence low
From noon, and gentle airs, due at their hour,
To fan the earth now waked, and usher in
The evening cool; when he, from wrath more cool,
Came the mild Judge, and Intercessour both,
To sentence Man: The voice of God they heard
Now walking in the garden, by soft winds
Brought to their ears, while day declined; they heard,
And from his presence hid themselves among
The thickest trees, both man and wife; till God,
Approaching, thus to Adam called aloud.
Where art thou, Adam, wont with joy to meet
My coming seen far off? I miss thee here,
Not pleased, thus entertained with solitude,
Where obvious duty ere while appeared unsought:
Or come I less conspicuous, or what change
Absents thee, or what chance detains?—Come forth!
He came; and with him Eve, more loth, though first
To offend; discountenanced both, and discomposed;
Love was not in their looks, either to God,
Or to each other; but apparent guilt,
And shame, and perturbation, and despair,
Anger, and obstinacy, and hate, and guile.
Whence Adam, faltering long, thus answered brief.
I heard thee in the garden, and of thy voice
Afraid, being naked, hid myself. To whom
The gracious Judge without revile replied.
My voice thou oft hast heard, and hast not feared,
But still rejoiced; how is it now become
So dreadful to thee? That thou art naked, who
Hath told thee? Hast thou eaten of the tree,
Whereof I gave thee charge thou shouldst not eat?
To whom thus Adam sore beset replied.
O Heaven! in evil strait this day I stand
Before my Judge; either to undergo
Myself the total crime, or to accuse
My other self, the partner of my life;
Whose failing, while her faith to me remains,
I should conceal, and not expose to blame
By my complaint: but strict necessity
Subdues me, and calamitous constraint;
Lest on my head both sin and punishment,
However insupportable, be all
Devolved; though should I hold my peace, yet thou
Wouldst easily detect what I conceal.—
This Woman, whom thou madest to be my help,
And gavest me as thy perfect gift, so good,
So fit, so acceptable, so divine,
That from her hand I could suspect no ill,
And what she did, whatever in itself,
Her doing seemed to justify the deed;
She gave me of the tree, and I did eat.
To whom the Sovran Presence thus replied.
Was she thy God, that her thou didst obey
Before his voice? or was she made thy guide,
Superiour, or but equal, that to her
Thou didst resign thy manhood, and the place
Wherein God set thee above her made of thee,
And for thee, whose perfection far excelled
Hers in all real dignity? Adorned
She was indeed, and lovely, to attract
Thy love, not thy subjection; and her gifts
Were such, as under government well seemed;
Unseemly to bear rule; which was thy part
And person, hadst thou known thyself aright.
So having said, he thus to Eve in few.
Say, Woman, what is this which thou hast done?
To whom sad Eve, with shame nigh overwhelmed,
Confessing soon, yet not before her Judge
Bold or loquacious, thus abashed replied.
The Serpent me beguiled, and I did eat.
Which when the Lord God heard, without delay
To judgement he proceeded on the accused
Serpent, though brute; unable to transfer
The guilt on him, who made him instrument
Of mischief, and polluted from the end
Of his creation; justly then accursed,
As vitiated in nature: More to know
Concerned not Man, (since he no further knew)
Nor altered his offence; yet God at last
To Satan first in sin his doom applied,
Though in mysterious terms, judged as then best:
And on the Serpent thus his curse let fall.
Because thou hast done this, thou art accursed
Above all cattle, each beast of the field;
Upon thy belly groveling thou shalt go,
And dust shalt eat all the days of thy life.
Between thee and the woman I will put
Enmity, and between thine and her seed;
Her seed shall bruise thy head, thou bruise his heel.
So spake this oracle, then verified
When Jesus, Son of Mary, second Eve,
Saw Satan fall, like lightning, down from Heaven,
Prince of the air; then, rising from his grave
Spoiled Principalities and Powers, triumphed
In open show; and, with ascension bright,
Captivity led captive through the air,
The realm itself of Satan, long usurped;
Whom he shall tread at last under our feet;
Even he, who now foretold his fatal bruise;
And to the Woman thus his sentence turned.
Thy sorrow I will greatly multiply
By thy conception; children thou shalt bring
In sorrow forth; and to thy husband’s will
Thine shall submit; he over thee shall rule.
On Adam last thus judgement he pronounced.
Because thou hast hearkened to the voice of thy wife,
And eaten of the tree, concerning which
I charged thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat thereof:
Cursed is the ground for thy sake; thou in sorrow
Shalt eat thereof, all the days of thy life;
Thorns also and thistles it shall bring thee forth
Unbid; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field;
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread,
Till thou return unto the ground; for thou
Out of the ground wast taken, know thy birth,
For dust thou art, and shalt to dust return.
So judged he Man, both Judge and Saviour sent;
And the instant stroke of death, denounced that day,
Removed far off; then, pitying how they stood
Before him naked to the air, that now
Must suffer change, disdained not to begin
Thenceforth the form of servant to assume;
As when he washed his servants feet; so now,
As father of his family, he clad
Their nakedness with skins of beasts, or slain,
Or as the snake with youthful coat repaid;
And thought not much to clothe his enemies;
Nor he their outward only with the skins
Of beasts, but inward nakedness, much more.
Opprobrious, with his robe of righteousness,
Arraying, covered from his Father’s sight.
To him with swift ascent he up returned,
Into his blissful bosom reassumed
In glory, as of old; to him appeased
All, though all-knowing, what had passed with Man
Recounted, mixing intercession sweet.
Mean while, ere thus was sinned and judged on Earth,
Within the gates of Hell sat Sin and Death,
In counterview within the gates, that now
Stood open wide, belching outrageous flame
Far into Chaos, since the Fiend passed through,
Sin opening; who thus now to Death began.
O Son, why sit we here each other viewing
Idly, while Satan, our great author, thrives
In other worlds, and happier seat provides
For us, his offspring dear? It cannot be
But that success attends him; if mishap,
Ere this he had returned, with fury driven
By his avengers; since no place like this
Can fit his punishment, or their revenge.
Methinks I feel new strength within me rise,
Wings growing, and dominion given me large
Beyond this deep; whatever draws me on,
Or sympathy, or some connatural force,
Powerful at greatest distance to unite,
With secret amity, things of like kind,
By secretest conveyance. Thou, my shade
Inseparable, must with me along;
For Death from Sin no power can separate.
But, lest the difficulty of passing back
Stay his return perhaps over this gulf
Impassable, impervious; let us try
Adventurous work, yet to thy power and mine
Not unagreeable, to found a path
Over this main from Hell to that new world,
Where Satan now prevails; a monument
Of merit high to all the infernal host,
Easing their passage hence, for intercourse,
Or transmigration, as their lot shall lead.
Nor can I miss the way, so strongly drawn
By this new-felt attraction and instinct.
Whom thus the meager Shadow answered soon.
Go, whither Fate, and inclination strong,
Leads thee; I shall not lag behind, nor err
The way, thou leading; such a scent I draw
Of carnage, prey innumerable, and taste
The savour of death from all things there that live:
Nor shall I to the work thou enterprisest
Be wanting, but afford thee equal aid.
So saying, with delight he snuffed the smell
Of mortal change on earth. As when a flock
Of ravenous fowl, though many a league remote,
Against the day of battle, to a field,
Where armies lie encamped, come flying, lured
With scent of living carcasses designed
For death, the following day, in bloody fight:
So scented the grim Feature, and upturned
His nostril wide into the murky air;
Sagacious of his quarry from so far.
Then both from out Hell-gates, into the waste
Wide anarchy of Chaos, damp and dark,
Flew diverse; and with power (their power was great)
Hovering upon the waters, what they met
Solid or slimy, as in raging sea
Tost up and down, together crouded drove,
From each side shoaling towards the mouth of Hell;
As when two polar winds, blowing adverse
Upon the Cronian sea, together drive
Mountains of ice, that stop the imagined way
Beyond Petsora eastward, to the rich
Cathaian coast. The aggregated soil
Death with his mace petrifick, cold and dry,
As with a trident, smote; and fixed as firm
As Delos, floating once; the rest his look
Bound with Gorgonian rigour not to move;
And with Asphaltick slime, broad as the gate,
Deep to the roots of Hell the gathered beach
They fastened, and the mole immense wrought on
Over the foaming deep high-arched, a bridge
Of length prodigious, joining to the wall
Immoveable of this now fenceless world,
Forfeit to Death; from hence a passage broad,
Smooth, easy, inoffensive, down to Hell.
So, if great things to small may be compared,
Xerxes, the liberty of Greece to yoke,
From Susa, his Memnonian palace high,
Came to the sea: and, over Hellespont
Bridging his way, Europe with Asia joined,
And scourged with many a stroke the indignant waves.
Now had they brought the work by wonderous art
Pontifical, a ridge of pendant rock,
Over the vexed abyss, following the track
Of Satan to the self-same place where he
First lighted from his wing, and landed safe
From out of Chaos, to the outside bare
Of this round world: With pins of adamant
And chains they made all fast, too fast they made
And durable! And now in little space
The confines met of empyrean Heaven,
And of this World; and, on the left hand, Hell
With long reach interposed; three several ways
In sight, to each of these three places led.
And now their way to Earth they had descried,
To Paradise first tending; when, behold!
Satan, in likeness of an Angel bright,
Betwixt the Centaur and the Scorpion steering
His zenith, while the sun in Aries rose:
Disguised he came; but those his children dear
Their parent soon discerned, though in disguise.
He, after Eve seduced, unminded slunk
Into the wood fast by; and, changing shape,
To observe the sequel, saw his guileful act
By Eve, though all unweeting, seconded
Upon her husband; saw their shame that sought
Vain covertures; but when he saw descend
The Son of God to judge them, terrified
He fled; not hoping to escape, but shun
The present; fearing, guilty, what his wrath
Might suddenly inflict; that past, returned
By night, and listening where the hapless pair
Sat in their sad discourse, and various plaint,
Thence gathered his own doom; which understood
Not instant, but of future time, with joy
And tidings fraught, to Hell he now returned;
And at the brink of Chaos, near the foot
Of this new wonderous pontifice, unhoped
Met, who to meet him came, his offspring dear.
Great joy was at their meeting, and at sight
Of that stupendous bridge his joy encreased.
Long he admiring stood, till Sin, his fair
Enchanting daughter, thus the silence broke.
O Parent, these are thy magnifick deeds,
Thy trophies! which thou viewest as not thine own;
Thou art their author, and prime architect:
For I no sooner in my heart divined,
My heart, which by a secret harmony
Still moves with thine, joined in connexion sweet,
That thou on earth hadst prospered, which thy looks
Now also evidence, but straight I felt,
Though distant from thee worlds between, yet felt,
That I must after thee, with this thy son;
Such fatal consequence unites us three!
Hell could no longer hold us in our bounds,
Nor this unvoyageable gulf obscure
Detain from following thy illustrious track.
Thou hast achieved our liberty, confined
Within Hell-gates till now; thou us impowered
To fortify thus far, and overlay,
With this portentous bridge, the dark abyss.
Thine now is all this world; thy virtue hath won
What thy hands builded not; thy wisdom gained
With odds what war hath lost, and fully avenged
Our foil in Heaven; here thou shalt monarch reign,
There didst not; there let him still victor sway,
As battle hath adjudged; from this new world
Retiring, by his own doom alienated;
And henceforth monarchy with thee divide
Of all things, parted by the empyreal bounds,
His quadrature, from thy orbicular world;
Or try thee now more dangerous to his throne.
Whom thus the Prince of darkness answered glad.
Fair Daughter, and thou Son and Grandchild both;
High proof ye now have given to be the race
Of Satan (for I glory in the name,
Antagonist of Heaven’s Almighty King,)
Amply have merited of me, of all
The infernal empire, that so near Heaven’s door
Triumphal with triumphal act have met,
Mine, with this glorious work; and made one realm,
Hell and this world, one realm, one continent
Of easy thorough-fare. Therefore, while I
Descend through darkness, on your road with ease,
To my associate Powers, them to acquaint
With these successes, and with them rejoice;
You two this way, among these numerous orbs,
All yours, right down to Paradise descend;
There dwell, and reign in bliss; thence on the earth
Dominion exercise and in the air,
Chiefly on Man, sole lord of all declared;
Him first make sure your thrall, and lastly kill.
My substitutes I send ye, and create
Plenipotent on earth, of matchless might
Issuing from me: on your joint vigour now
My hold of this new kingdom all depends,
Through Sin to Death exposed by my exploit.
If your joint power prevail, the affairs of Hell
No detriment need fear; go, and be strong!
So saying he dismissed them; they with speed
Their course through thickest constellations held,
Spreading their bane; the blasted stars looked wan,
And planets, planet-struck, real eclipse
Then suffered. The other way Satan went down
The causey to Hell-gate: On either side
Disparted Chaos overbuilt exclaimed,
And with rebounding surge the bars assailed,
That scorned his indignation: Through the gate,
Wide open and unguarded, Satan passed,
And all about found desolate; for those,
Appointed to sit there, had left their charge,
Flown to the upper world; the rest were all
Far to the inland retired, about the walls
Of Pandemonium; city and proud seat
Of Lucifer, so by allusion called
Of that bright star to Satan paragoned;
There kept their watch the legions, while the Grand
In council sat, solicitous what chance
Might intercept their emperour sent; so he
Departing gave command, and they observed.
As when the Tartar from his Russian foe,
By Astracan, over the snowy plains,
Retires; or Bactrin Sophi, from the horns
Of Turkish crescent, leaves all waste beyond
The realm of Aladule, in his retreat
To Tauris or Casbeen: So these, the late
Heaven-banished host, left desart utmost Hell
Many a dark league, reduced in careful watch
Round their metropolis; and now expecting
Each hour their great adventurer, from the search
Of foreign worlds: He through the midst unmarked,
In show plebeian Angel militant
Of lowest order, passed; and from the door
Of that Plutonian hall, invisible
Ascended his high throne; which, under state
Of richest texture spread, at the upper end
Was placed in regal lustre. Down a while
He sat, and round about him saw unseen:
At last, as from a cloud, his fulgent head
And shape star-bright appeared, or brighter; clad
With what permissive glory since his fall
Was left him, or false glitter: All amazed
At that so sudden blaze the Stygian throng
Bent their aspect, and whom they wished beheld,
Their mighty Chief returned: loud was the acclaim:
Forth rushed in haste the great consulting peers,
Raised from their dark Divan, and with like joy
Congratulant approached him; who with hand
Silence, and with these words attention, won.
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers;
For in possession such, not only of right,
I call ye, and declare ye now; returned
Successful beyond hope, to lead ye forth
Triumphant out of this infernal pit
Abominable, accursed, the house of woe,
And dungeon of our tyrant: Now possess,
As Lords, a spacious world, to our native Heaven
Little inferiour, by my adventure hard
With peril great achieved. Long were to tell
What I have done; what suffered; with what pain
Voyaged th’ unreal, vast, unbounded deep
Of horrible confusion; over which
By Sin and Death a broad way now is paved,
To expedite your glorious march; but I
Toiled out my uncouth passage, forced to ride
The untractable abyss, plunged in the womb
Of unoriginal Night and Chaos wild;
That, jealous of their secrets, fiercely opposed
My journey strange, with clamorous uproar
Protesting Fate supreme; thence how I found
The new created world, which fame in Heaven
Long had foretold, a fabrick wonderful
Of absolute perfection! therein Man
Placed in a Paradise, by our exile
Made happy: Him by fraud I have seduced
From his Creator; and, the more to encrease
Your wonder, with an apple; he, thereat
Offended, worth your laughter! hath given up
Both his beloved Man, and all his world,
To Sin and Death a prey, and so to us,
Without our hazard, labour, or alarm;
To range in, and to dwell, and over Man
To rule, as over all he should have ruled.
True is, me also he hath judged, or rather
Me not, but the brute serpent in whose shape
Man I deceived: that which to me belongs,
Is enmity which he will put between
Me and mankind; I am to bruise his heel;
His seed, when is not set, shall bruise my head:
A world who would not purchase with a bruise,
Or much more grievous pain?—Ye have the account
Of my performance: What remains, ye Gods,
But up, and enter now into full bliss?
So having said, a while he stood, expecting
Their universal shout, and high applause,
To fill his ear; when, contrary, he hears
On all sides, from innumerable tongues,
A dismal universal hiss, the sound
Of publick scorn; he wondered, but not long
Had leisure, wondering at himself now more,
His visage drawn he felt to sharp and spare;
His arms clung to his ribs; his legs entwining
Each other, till supplanted down he fell
A monstrous serpent on his belly prone,
Reluctant, but in vain; a greater power
Now ruled him, punished in the shape he sinned,
According to his doom: he would have spoke,
But hiss for hiss returned with forked tongue
To forked tongue; for now were all transformed
Alike, to serpents all, as accessories
To his bold riot: Dreadful was the din
Of hissing through the hall, thick swarming now
With complicated monsters head and tail,
Scorpion, and Asp, and Amphisbaena dire,
Cerastes horned, Hydrus, and Elops drear,
And Dipsas; (not so thick swarmed once the soil
Bedropt with blood of Gorgon, or the isle
Ophiusa,) but still greatest he the midst,
Now Dragon grown, larger than whom the sun
Ingendered in the Pythian vale or slime,
Huge Python, and his power no less he seemed
Above the rest still to retain; they all
Him followed, issuing forth to the open field,
Where all yet left of that revolted rout,
Heaven-fallen, in station stood or just array;
Sublime with expectation when to see
In triumph issuing forth their glorious Chief;
They saw, but other sight instead! a croud
Of ugly serpents; horrour on them fell,
And horrid sympathy; for, what they saw,
They felt themselves, now changing; down their arms,
Down fell both spear and shield; down they as fast;
And the dire hiss renewed, and the dire form
Catched, by contagion; like in punishment,
As in their crime. Thus was the applause they meant,
Turned to exploding hiss, triumph to shame
Cast on themselves from their own mouths. There stood
A grove hard by, sprung up with this their change,
His will who reigns above, to aggravate
Their penance, laden with fair fruit, like that
Which grew in Paradise, the bait of Eve
Used by the Tempter: on that prospect strange
Their earnest eyes they fixed, imagining
For one forbidden tree a multitude
Now risen, to work them further woe or shame;
Yet, parched with scalding thirst and hunger fierce,
Though to delude them sent, could not abstain;
But on they rolled in heaps, and, up the trees
Climbing, sat thicker than the snaky locks
That curled Megaera: greedily they plucked
The fruitage fair to sight, like that which grew
Near that bituminous lake where Sodom flamed;
This more delusive, not the touch, but taste
Deceived; they, fondly thinking to allay
Their appetite with gust, instead of fruit
Chewed bitter ashes, which the offended taste
With spattering noise rejected: oft they assayed,
Hunger and thirst constraining; drugged as oft,
With hatefullest disrelish writhed their jaws,
With soot and cinders filled; so oft they fell
Into the same illusion, not as Man
Whom they triumphed once lapsed. Thus were they plagued
And worn with famine, long and ceaseless hiss,
Till their lost shape, permitted, they resumed;
Yearly enjoined, some say, to undergo,
This annual humbling certain numbered days,
To dash their pride, and joy, for Man seduced.
However, some tradition they dispersed
Among the Heathen, of their purchase got,
And fabled how the Serpent, whom they called
Ophion, with Eurynome, the wide—
Encroaching Eve perhaps, had first the rule
Of high Olympus; thence by Saturn driven
And Ops, ere yet Dictaean Jove was born.
Mean while in Paradise the hellish pair
Too soon arrived; Sin, there in power before,
Once actual; now in body, and to dwell
Habitual habitant; behind her Death,
Close following pace for pace, not mounted yet
On his pale horse: to whom Sin thus began.
Second of Satan sprung, all-conquering Death!
What thinkest thou of our empire now, though earned
With travel difficult, not better far
Than still at Hell’s dark threshold to have sat watch,
Unnamed, undreaded, and thyself half starved?
Whom thus the Sin-born monster answered soon.
To me, who with eternal famine pine,
Alike is Hell, or Paradise, or Heaven;
There best, where most with ravine I may meet;
Which here, though plenteous, all too little seems
To stuff this maw, this vast unhide-bound corps.
To whom the incestuous mother thus replied.
Thou therefore on these herbs, and fruits, and flowers,
Feed first; on each beast next, and fish, and fowl;
No homely morsels! and, whatever thing
The sithe of Time mows down, devour unspared;
Till I, in Man residing, through the race,
His thoughts, his looks, words, actions, all infect;
And season him thy last and sweetest prey.
This said, they both betook them several ways,
Both to destroy, or unimmortal make
All kinds, and for destruction to mature
Sooner or later; which the Almighty seeing,
From his transcendent seat the Saints among,
To those bright Orders uttered thus his voice.
See, with what heat these dogs of Hell advance
To waste and havock yonder world, which I
So fair and good created; and had still
Kept in that state, had not the folly of Man
Let in these wasteful furies, who impute
Folly to me; so doth the Prince of Hell
And his adherents, that with so much ease
I suffer them to enter and possess
A place so heavenly; and, conniving, seem
To gratify my scornful enemies,
That laugh, as if, transported with some fit
Of passion, I to them had quitted all,
At random yielded up to their misrule;
And know not that I called, and drew them thither,
My Hell-hounds, to lick up the draff and filth
Which Man’s polluting sin with taint hath shed
On what was pure; til, crammed and gorged, nigh burst
With sucked and glutted offal, at one sling
Of thy victorious arm, well-pleasing Son,
Both Sin, and Death, and yawning Grave, at last,
Through Chaos hurled, obstruct the mouth of Hell
For ever, and seal up his ravenous jaws.
Then Heaven and Earth renewed shall be made pure
To sanctity, that shall receive no stain:
Till then, the curse pronounced on both precedes.
He ended, and the heavenly audience loud
Sung Halleluiah, as the sound of seas,
Through multitude that sung: Just are thy ways,
Righteous are thy decrees on all thy works;
Who can extenuate thee? Next, to the Son,
Destined Restorer of mankind, by whom
New Heaven and Earth shall to the ages rise,
Or down from Heaven descend.—Such was their song;
While the Creator, calling forth by name
His mighty Angels, gave them several charge,
As sorted best with present things. The sun
Had first his precept so to move, so shine,
As might affect the earth with cold and heat
Scarce tolerable; and from the north to call
Decrepit winter; from the south to bring
Solstitial summer’s heat. To the blanc moon
Her office they prescribed; to the other five
Their planetary motions, and aspects,
In sextile, square, and trine, and opposite,
Of noxious efficacy, and when to join
In synod unbenign; and taught the fixed
Their influence malignant when to shower,
Which of them rising with the sun, or falling,
Should prove tempestuous: To the winds they set
Their corners, when with bluster to confound
Sea, air, and shore; the thunder when to roll
With terrour through the dark aereal hall.
Some say, he bid his Angels turn ascanse
The poles of earth, twice ten degrees and more,
From the sun’s axle; they with labour pushed
Oblique the centrick globe: Some say, the sun
Was bid turn reins from the equinoctial road
Like distant breadth to Taurus with the seven
Atlantick Sisters, and the Spartan Twins,
Up to the Tropick Crab: thence down amain
By Leo, and the Virgin, and the Scales,
As deep as Capricorn; to bring in change
Of seasons to each clime; else had the spring
Perpetual smiled on earth with vernant flowers,
Equal in days and nights, except to those
Beyond the polar circles; to them day
Had unbenighted shone, while the low sun,
To recompense his distance, in their sight
Had rounded still the horizon, and not known
Or east or west; which had forbid the snow
From cold Estotiland, and south as far
Beneath Magellan. At that tasted fruit
The sun, as from Thyestean banquet, turned
His course intended; else, how had the world
Inhabited, though sinless, more than now,
Avoided pinching cold and scorching heat?
These changes in the Heavens, though slow, produced
Like change on sea and land; sideral blast,
Vapour, and mist, and exhalation hot,
Corrupt and pestilent: Now from the north
Of Norumbega, and the Samoed shore,
Bursting their brazen dungeon, armed with ice,
And snow, and hail, and stormy gust and flaw,
Boreas, and Caecias, and Argestes loud,
And Thrascias, rend the woods, and seas upturn;
With adverse blast upturns them from the south
Notus, and Afer black with thunderous clouds
From Serraliona; thwart of these, as fierce,
Forth rush the Levant and the Ponent winds,
Eurus and Zephyr, with their lateral noise,
Sirocco and Libecchio. Thus began
Outrage from lifeless things; but Discord first,
Daughter of Sin, among the irrational
Death introduced, through fierce antipathy:
Beast now with beast ’gan war, and fowl with fowl,
And fish with fish; to graze the herb all leaving,
Devoured each other; nor stood much in awe
Of Man, but fled him; or, with countenance grim,
Glared on him passing. These were from without
The growing miseries, which Adam saw
Already in part, though hid in gloomiest shade,
To sorrow abandoned, but worse felt within;
And, in a troubled sea of passion tost,
Thus to disburden sought with sad complaint.
O miserable of happy! Is this the end
Of this new glorious world, and me so late
The glory of that glory, who now become
Accursed, of blessed? hide me from the face
Of God, whom to behold was then my highth
Of happiness!—Yet well, if here would end
The misery; I deserved it, and would bear
My own deservings; but this will not serve:
All that I eat or drink, or shall beget,
Is propagated curse. O voice, once heard
Delightfully, Encrease and multiply;
Now death to hear! for what can I encrease,
Or multiply, but curses on my head?
Who of all ages to succeed, but, feeling
The evil on him brought by me, will curse
My head? Ill fare our ancestor impure,
For this we may thank Adam! but his thanks
Shall be the execration: so, besides
Mine own that bide upon me, all from me
Shall with a fierce reflux on me rebound;
On me, as on their natural center, light
Heavy, though in their place. O fleeting joys
Of Paradise, dear bought with lasting woes!
Did I request thee, Maker, from my clay
To mould me Man? did I solicit thee
From darkness to promote me, or here place
In this delicious garden? As my will
Concurred not to my being, it were but right
And equal to reduce me to my dust;
Desirous to resign and render back
All I received; unable to perform
Thy terms too hard, by which I was to hold
The good I sought not. To the loss of that,
Sufficient penalty, why hast thou added
The sense of endless woes? Inexplicable
Thy justice seems; yet to say truth, too late
I thus contest; then should have been refused
Those terms whatever, when they were proposed:
Thou didst accept them; wilt thou enjoy the good,
Then cavil the conditions? And, though God
Made thee without thy leave, what if thy son
Prove disobedient, and reproved, retort,
“Wherefore didst thou beget me? I sought it not!”
Wouldst thou admit for his contempt of thee
That proud excuse? yet him not thy election,
But natural necessity begot.
God made thee of choice his own, and of his own
To serve him; thy reward was of his grace;
Thy punishment then, justly is at his will.
Be it so, for I submit; his doom is fair,
That dust I am, and shall to dust return.
O welcome hour whenever! Why delays
His hand to execute what his decree
Fixed on this day? Why do I overlive,
Why am I mocked with death, and lengthened out
To deathless pain? How gladly would I meet
Mortality my sentence, and be earth
Insensible! How glad would lay me down
As in my mother’s lap! There I should rest,
And sleep secure; his dreadful voice no more
Would thunder in my ears; no fear of worse
To me, and to my offspring, would torment me
With cruel expectation. Yet one doubt
Pursues me still, lest all I cannot die;
Lest that pure breath of life, the spirit of Man
Which God inspired, cannot together perish
With this corporeal clod; then, in the grave,
Or in some other dismal place, who knows
But I shall die a living death? O thought
Horrid, if true! Yet why? It was but breath
Of life that sinned; what dies but what had life
And sin? The body properly had neither,
All of me then shall die: let this appease
The doubt, since human reach no further knows.
For though the Lord of all be infinite,
Is his wrath also? Be it, Man is not so,
But mortal doomed. How can he exercise
Wrath without end on Man, whom death must end?
Can he make deathless death? That were to make
Strange contradiction, which to God himself
Impossible is held; as argument
Of weakness, not of power. Will he draw out,
For anger’s sake, finite to infinite,
In punished Man, to satisfy his rigour,
Satisfied never? That were to extend
His sentence beyond dust and Nature’s law;
By which all causes else, according still
To the reception of their matter, act;
Not to the extent of their own sphere. But say
That death be not one stroke, as I supposed,
Bereaving sense, but endless misery
From this day onward; which I feel begun
Both in me, and without me; and so last
To perpetuity;—Ay me! that fear
Comes thundering back with dreadful revolution
On my defenceless head; both Death and I
Am found eternal, and incorporate both;
Nor I on my part single; in me all
Posterity stands cursed: Fair patrimony
That I must leave ye, Sons! O, were I able
To waste it all myself, and leave ye none!
So disinherited, how would you bless
Me, now your curse! Ah, why should all mankind,
For one man’s fault, thus guiltless be condemned,
It guiltless? But from me what can proceed,
But all corrupt; both mind and will depraved
Not to do only, but to will the same
With me? How can they then acquitted stand
In sight of God? Him, after all disputes,
Forced I absolve: all my evasions vain,
And reasonings, though through mazes, lead me still
But to my own conviction: first and last
On me, me only, as the source and spring
Of all corruption, all the blame lights due;
So might the wrath! Fond wish! couldst thou support
That burden, heavier than the earth to bear;
Than all the world much heavier, though divided
With that bad Woman? Thus, what thou desirest,
And what thou fearest, alike destroys all hope
Of refuge, and concludes thee miserable
Beyond all past example and future;
To Satan only like both crime and doom.
O Conscience! into what abyss of fears
And horrours hast thou driven me; out of which
I find no way, from deep to deeper plunged!
Thus Adam to himself lamented loud,
Through the still night; not now, as ere Man fell,
Wholesome, and cool, and mild, but with black air
Accompanied; with damps, and dreadful gloom;
Which to his evil conscience represented
All things with double terrour: On the ground
Outstretched he lay, on the cold ground; and oft
Cursed his creation; Death as oft accused
Of tardy execution, since denounced
The day of his offence. Why comes not Death,
Said he, with one thrice-acceptable stroke
To end me? Shall Truth fail to keep her word,
Justice Divine not hasten to be just?
But Death comes not at call; Justice Divine
Mends not her slowest pace for prayers or cries,
O woods, O fountains, hillocks, dales, and bowers!
With other echo late I taught your shades
To answer, and resound far other song.—
Whom thus afflicted when sad Eve beheld,
Desolate where she sat, approaching nigh,
Soft words to his fierce passion she assayed:
But her with stern regard he thus repelled.
Out of my sight, thou Serpent! That name best
Befits thee with him leagued, thyself as false
And hateful; nothing wants, but that thy shape,
Like his, and colour serpentine, may show
Thy inward fraud; to warn all creatures from thee
Henceforth; lest that too heavenly form, pretended
To hellish falshood, snare them! But for thee
I had persisted happy; had not thy pride
And wandering vanity, when least was safe,
Rejected my forewarning, and disdained
Not to be trusted; longing to be seen,
Though by the Devil himself; him overweening
To over-reach; but, with the serpent meeting,
Fooled and beguiled; by him thou, I by thee
To trust thee from my side; imagined wise,
Constant, mature, proof against all assaults;
And understood not all was but a show,
Rather than solid virtue; all but a rib
Crooked by nature, bent, as now appears,
More to the part sinister, from me drawn;
Well if thrown out, as supernumerary
To my just number found. O! why did God,
Creator wise, that peopled highest Heaven
With Spirits masculine, create at last
This novelty on earth, this fair defect
Of nature, and not fill the world at once
With Men, as Angels, without feminine;
Or find some other way to generate
Mankind? This mischief had not been befallen,
And more that shall befall; innumerable
Disturbances on earth through female snares,
And strait conjunction with this sex: for either
He never shall find out fit mate, but such
As some misfortune brings him, or mistake;
Or whom he wishes most shall seldom gain
Through her perverseness, but shall see her gained
By a far worse; or, if she love, withheld
By parents; or his happiest choice too late
Shall meet, already linked and wedlock-bound
To a fell adversary, his hate or shame:
Which infinite calamity shall cause
To human life, and houshold peace confound.
He added not, and from her turned; but Eve,
Not so repulsed, with tears that ceased not flowing
And tresses all disordered, at his feet
Fell humble; and, embracing them, besought
His peace, and thus proceeded in her plaint.
Forsake me not thus, Adam! witness Heaven
What love sincere, and reverence in my heart
I bear thee, and unweeting have offended,
Unhappily deceived! Thy suppliant
I beg, and clasp thy knees; bereave me not,
Whereon I live, thy gentle looks, thy aid,
Thy counsel, in this uttermost distress,
My only strength and stay: Forlorn of thee,
Whither shall I betake me, where subsist?
While yet we live, scarce one short hour perhaps,
Between us two let there be peace; both joining,
As joined in injuries, one enmity
Against a foe by doom express assigned us,
That cruel Serpent: On me exercise not
Thy hatred for this misery befallen;
On me already lost, me than thyself
More miserable! Both have sinned; but thou
Against God only; I against God and thee;
And to the place of judgement will return,
There with my cries importune Heaven; that all
The sentence, from thy head removed, may light
On me, sole cause to thee of all this woe;
Me, me only, just object of his ire!
She ended weeping; and her lowly plight,
Immoveable, till peace obtained from fault
Acknowledged and deplored, in Adam wrought
Commiseration: Soon his heart relented
Towards her, his life so late, and sole delight,
Now at his feet submissive in distress;
Creature so fair his reconcilement seeking,
His counsel, whom she had displeased, his aid:
As one disarmed, his anger all he lost,
And thus with peaceful words upraised her soon.
Unwary, and too desirous, as before,
So now of what thou knowest not, who desirest
The punishment all on thyself; alas!
Bear thine own first, ill able to sustain
His full wrath, whose thou feelest as yet least part,
And my displeasure bearest so ill. If prayers
Could alter high decrees, I to that place
Would speed before thee, and be louder heard,
That on my head all might be visited;
Thy frailty and infirmer sex forgiven,
To me committed, and by me exposed.
But rise;—let us no more contend, nor blame
Each other, blamed enough elsewhere; but strive
In offices of love, how we may lighten
Each other’s burden, in our share of woe;
Since this day’s death denounced, if aught I see,
Will prove no sudden, but a slow-paced evil;
A long day’s dying, to augment our pain;
And to our seed (O hapless seed!) derived.
To whom thus Eve, recovering heart, replied.
Adam, by sad experiment I know
How little weight my words with thee can find,
Found so erroneous; thence by just event
Found so unfortunate: Nevertheless,
Restored by thee, vile as I am, to place
Of new acceptance, hopeful to regain
Thy love, the sole contentment of my heart
Living or dying, from thee I will not hide
What thoughts in my unquiet breast are risen,
Tending to some relief of our extremes,
Or end; though sharp and sad, yet tolerable,
As in our evils, and of easier choice.
If care of our descent perplex us most,
Which must be born to certain woe, devoured
By Death at last; and miserable it is
To be to others cause of misery,
Our own begotten, and of our loins to bring
Into this cursed world a woeful race,
That after wretched life must be at last
Food for so foul a monster; in thy power
It lies, yet ere conception to prevent
The race unblest, to being yet unbegot.
Childless thou art, childless remain: so Death
Shall be deceived his glut, and with us two
Be forced to satisfy his ravenous maw.
But if thou judge it hard and difficult,
Conversing, looking, loving, to abstain
From love’s due rights, nuptial embraces sweet;
And with desire to languish without hope,
Before the present object languishing
With like desire; which would be misery
And torment less than none of what we dread;
Then, both ourselves and seed at once to free
From what we fear for both, let us make short,—
Let us seek Death;—or, he not found, supply
With our own hands his office on ourselves:
Why stand we longer shivering under fears,
That show no end but death, and have the power,
Of many ways to die the shortest choosing,
Destruction with destruction to destroy?—
She ended here, or vehement despair
Broke off the rest: so much of death her thoughts
Had entertained, as dyed her cheeks with pale.
But Adam, with such counsel nothing swayed,
To better hopes his more attentive mind
Labouring had raised; and thus to Eve replied.
Eve, thy contempt of life and pleasure seems
To argue in thee something more sublime
And excellent, than what thy mind contemns;
But self-destruction therefore sought, refutes
That excellence thought in thee; and implies,
Not thy contempt, but anguish and regret
For loss of life and pleasure overloved.
Or if thou covet death, as utmost end
Of misery, so thinking to evade
The penalty pronounced; doubt not but God
Hath wiselier armed his vengeful ire, than so
To be forestalled; much more I fear lest death,
So snatched, will not exempt us from the pain
We are by doom to pay; rather, such acts
Of contumacy will provoke the Highest
To make death in us live: Then let us seek
Some safer resolution, which methinks
I have in view, calling to mind with heed
Part of our sentence, that thy seed shall bruise
The Serpent’s head; piteous amends! unless
Be meant, whom I conjecture, our grand foe,
Satan; who, in the serpent, hath contrived
Against us this deceit: To crush his head
Would be revenge indeed! which will be lost
By death brought on ourselves, or childless days
Resolved, as thou proposest; so our foe
Shal ’scape his punishment ordained, and we
Instead shall double ours upon our heads.
No more be mentioned then of violence
Against ourselves; and wilful barrenness,
That cuts us off from hope; and savours only
Rancour and pride, impatience and despite,
Reluctance against God and his just yoke
Laid on our necks. Remember with what mild
And gracious temper he both heard, and judged,
Without wrath or reviling; we expected
Immediate dissolution, which we thought
Was meant by death that day; when lo! to thee
Pains only in child-bearing were foretold,
And bringing forth; soon recompensed with joy,
Fruit of thy womb: On me the curse aslope
Glanced on the ground; with labour I must earn
My bread; what harm? Idleness had been worse;
My labour will sustain me; and, lest cold
Or heat should injure us, his timely care
Hath, unbesought, provided; and his hands
Clothed us unworthy, pitying while he judged;
How much more, if we pray him, will his ear
Be open, and his heart to pity incline,
And teach us further by what means to shun
The inclement seasons, rain, ice, hail, and snow!
Which now the sky, with various face, begins
To show us in this mountain; while the winds
Blow moist and keen, shattering the graceful locks
Of these fair spreading trees; which bids us seek
Some better shroud, some better warmth to cherish
Our limbs benummed, ere this diurnal star
Leave cold the night, how we his gathered beams
Reflected may with matter sere foment;
Or, by collision of two bodies, grind
The air attrite to fire; as late the clouds
Justling, or pushed with winds, rude in their shock,
Tine the slant lightning; whose thwart flame, driven down
Kindles the gummy bark of fir or pine;
And sends a comfortable heat from far,
Which might supply the sun: Such fire to use,
And what may else be remedy or cure
To evils which our own misdeeds have wrought,
He will instruct us praying, and of grace
Beseeching him; so as we need not fear
To pass commodiously this life, sustained
By him with many comforts, till we end
In dust, our final rest and native home.
What better can we do, than, to the place
Repairing where he judged us, prostrate fall
Before him reverent; and there confess
Humbly our faults, and pardon beg; with tears
Watering the ground, and with our sighs the air
Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign
Of sorrow unfeigned, and humiliation meek.
Undoubtedly he will relent, and turn
From his displeasure; in whose look serene,
When angry most he seemed and most severe,
What else but favour, grace, and mercy, shone?
So spake our father penitent; nor Eve
Felt less remorse: they, forthwith to the place
Repairing where he judged them, prostrate fell
Before him reverent; and both confessed
Humbly their faults, and pardon begged; with tears
Watering the ground, and with their sighs the air
Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign
Of sorrow unfeigned, and humiliation meek.






Thus they, in lowliest plight, repentant stood
Praying; for from the mercy-seat above
Prevenient grace descending had removed
The stony from their hearts, and made new flesh
Regenerate grow instead; that sighs now breathed
Unutterable; which the Spirit of prayer
Inspired, and winged for Heaven with speedier flight
Than loudest oratory: Yet their port
Not of mean suitors; nor important less
Seemed their petition, than when the ancient pair
In fables old, less ancient yet than these,
Deucalion and chaste Pyrrha, to restore
The race of mankind drowned, before the shrine
Of Themis stood devout. To Heaven their prayers
Flew up, nor missed the way, by envious winds
Blown vagabond or frustrate: in they passed
Dimensionless through heavenly doors; then clad
With incense, where the golden altar fumed,
By their great intercessour, came in sight
Before the Father’s throne: them the glad Son
Presenting, thus to intercede began.
See Father, what first-fruits on earth are sprung
From thy implanted grace in Man; these sighs
And prayers, which in this golden censer mixed
With incense, I thy priest before thee bring;
Fruits of more pleasing savour, from thy seed
Sown with contrition in his heart, than those
Which, his own hand manuring, all the trees
Of Paradise could have produced, ere fallen
From innocence. Now therefore, bend thine ear
To supplication; hear his sighs, though mute;
Unskilful with what words to pray, let me
Interpret for him; me, his advocate
And propitiation; all his works on me,
Good, or not good, ingraft; my merit those
Shall perfect, and for these my death shall pay.
Accept me; and, in me, from these receive
The smell of peace toward mankind: let him live
Before thee reconciled, at least his days
Numbered, though sad; till death, his doom, (which I
To mitigate thus plead, not to reverse,)
To better life shall yield him: where with me
All my redeemed may dwell in joy and bliss;
Made one with me, as I with thee am one.
To whom the Father, without cloud, serene.
All thy request for Man, accepted Son,
Obtain; all thy request was my decree:
But, longer in that Paradise to dwell,
The law I gave to Nature him forbids:
Those pure immortal elements, that know,
No gross, no unharmonious mixture foul,
Eject him, tainted now; and purge him off,
As a distemper, gross, to air as gross,
And mortal food; as may dispose him best
For dissolution wrought by sin, that first
Distempered all things, and of incorrupt
Corrupted. I, at first, with two fair gifts
Created him endowed; with happiness,
And immortality: that fondly lost,
This other served but to eternize woe;
Till I provided death: so death becomes
His final remedy; and, after life,
Tried in sharp tribulation, and refined
By faith and faithful works, to second life,
Waked in the renovation of the just,
Resigns him up with Heaven and Earth renewed.
But let us call to synod all the Blest,
Through Heaven’s wide bounds: from them I will not hide
My judgements; how with mankind I proceed,
As how with peccant Angels late they saw,
And in their state, though firm, stood more confirmed.
He ended, and the Son gave signal high
To the bright minister that watched; he blew
His trumpet, heard in Oreb since perhaps
When God descended, and perhaps once more
To sound at general doom. The angelick blast
Filled all the regions: from their blisful bowers
Of amarantine shade, fountain or spring,
By the waters of life, where’er they sat
In fellowships of joy, the sons of light
Hasted, resorting to the summons high;
And took their seats; till from his throne supreme
The Almighty thus pronounced his sovran will.
O Sons, like one of us Man is become
To know both good and evil, since his taste
Of that defended fruit; but let him boast
His knowledge of good lost, and evil got;
Happier! had it sufficed him to have known
Good by itself, and evil not at all.
He sorrows now, repents, and prays contrite,
My motions in him; longer than they move,
His heart I know, how variable and vain,
Self-left. Lest therefore his now bolder hand
Reach also of the tree of life, and eat,
And live for ever, dream at least to live
For ever, to remove him I decree,
And send him from the garden forth to till
The ground whence he was taken, fitter soil.
Michael, this my behest have thou in charge;
Take to thee from among the Cherubim
Thy choice of flaming warriours, lest the Fiend,
Or in behalf of Man, or to invade
Vacant possession, some new trouble raise:
Haste thee, and from the Paradise of God
Without remorse drive out the sinful pair;
From hallowed ground the unholy; and denounce
To them, and to their progeny, from thence
Perpetual banishment. Yet, lest they faint
At the sad sentence rigorously urged,
(For I behold them softened, and with tears
Bewailing their excess,) all terrour hide.
If patiently thy bidding they obey,
Dismiss them not disconsolate; reveal
To Adam what shall come in future days,
As I shall thee enlighten; intermix
My covenant in the Woman’s seed renewed;
So send them forth, though sorrowing, yet in peace:
And on the east side of the garden place,
Where entrance up from Eden easiest climbs,
Cherubick watch; and of a sword the flame
Wide-waving; all approach far off to fright,
And guard all passage to the tree of life:
Lest Paradise a receptacle prove
To Spirits foul, and all my trees their prey;
With whose stolen fruit Man once more to delude.
He ceased; and the arch-angelick Power prepared
For swift descent; with him the cohort bright
Of watchful Cherubim: four faces each
Had, like a double Janus; all their shape
Spangled with eyes more numerous than those
Of Argus, and more wakeful than to drouse,
Charmed with Arcadian pipe, the pastoral reed
Of Hermes, or his opiate rod. Mean while,
To re-salute the world with sacred light,
Leucothea waked; and with fresh dews imbalmed
The earth; when Adam and first matron Eve
Had ended now their orisons, and found
Strength added from above; new hope to spring
Out of despair; joy, but with fear yet linked;
Which thus to Eve his welcome words renewed.
Eve, easily my faith admit, that all
The good which we enjoy from Heaven descends;
But, that from us aught should ascend to Heaven
So prevalent as to concern the mind
Of God high-blest, or to incline his will,
Hard to belief may seem; yet this will prayer
Or one short sigh of human breath, upborne
Even to the seat of God. For since I sought
By prayer the offended Deity to appease;
Kneeled, and before him humbled all my heart;
Methought I saw him placable and mild,
Bending his ear; persuasion in me grew
That I was heard with favour; peace returned
Home to my breast, and to my memory
His promise, that thy seed shall bruise our foe;
Which, then not minded in dismay, yet now
Assures me that the bitterness of death
Is past, and we shall live. Whence hail to thee,
Eve rightly called, mother of all mankind,
Mother of all things living, since by thee
Man is to live; and all things live for Man.
To whom thus Eve with sad demeanour meek.
Ill-worthy I such title should belong
To me transgressour; who, for thee ordained
A help, became thy snare; to me reproach
Rather belongs, distrust, and all dispraise:
But infinite in pardon was my Judge,
That I, who first brought death on all, am graced
The source of life; next favourable thou,
Who highly thus to entitle me vouchsaf’st,
Far other name deserving. But the field
To labour calls us, now with sweat imposed,
Though after sleepless night; for see! the morn,
All unconcerned with our unrest, begins
Her rosy progress smiling: let us forth;
I never from thy side henceforth to stray,
Where’er our day’s work lies, though now enjoined
Laborious, till day droop; while here we dwell,
What can be toilsome in these pleasant walks?
Here let us live, though in fallen state, content.
So spake, so wished much humbled Eve; but Fate
Subscribed not: Nature first gave signs, impressed
On bird, beast, air; air suddenly eclipsed,
After short blush of morn; nigh in her sight
The bird of Jove, stooped from his aery tour,
Two birds of gayest plume before him drove;
Down from a hill the beast that reigns in woods,
First hunter then, pursued a gentle brace,
Goodliest of all the forest, hart and hind;
Direct to the eastern gate was bent their flight.
Adam observed, and with his eye the chase
Pursuing, not unmoved, to Eve thus spake.
O Eve, some further change awaits us nigh,
Which Heaven, by these mute signs in Nature, shows
Forerunners of his purpose; or to warn
Us, haply too secure, of our discharge
From penalty, because from death released
Some days: how long, and what till then our life,
Who knows? or more than this, that we are dust,
And thither must return, and be no more?
Why else this double object in our sight
Of flight pursued in the air, and o’er the ground,
One way the self-same hour? why in the east
Darkness ere day’s mid-course, and morning-light
More orient in yon western cloud, that draws
O’er the blue firmament a radiant white,
And slow descends with something heavenly fraught?
He erred not; for by this the heavenly bands
Down from a sky of jasper lighted now
In Paradise, and on a hill made halt;
A glorious apparition, had not doubt
And carnal fear that day dimmed Adam’s eye.
Not that more glorious, when the Angels met
Jacob in Mahanaim, where he saw
The field pavilioned with his guardians bright;
Nor that, which on the flaming mount appeared
In Dothan, covered with a camp of fire,
Against the Syrian king, who to surprise
One man, assassin-like, had levied war,
War unproclaimed. The princely Hierarch
In their bright stand there left his Powers, to seise
Possession of the garden; he alone,
To find where Adam sheltered, took his way,
Not unperceived of Adam; who to Eve,
While the great visitant approached, thus spake.
Eve, now expect great tidings, which perhaps
Of us will soon determine, or impose
New laws to be observed; for I descry,
From yonder blazing cloud that veils the hill,
One of the heavenly host; and, by his gait,
None of the meanest; some great Potentate
Or of the Thrones above; such majesty
Invests him coming! yet not terrible,
That I should fear; nor sociably mild,
As Raphael, that I should much confide;
But solemn and sublime; whom not to offend,
With reverence I must meet, and thou retire.
He ended: and the Arch-Angel soon drew nigh,
Not in his shape celestial, but as man
Clad to meet man; over his lucid arms
A military vest of purple flowed,
Livelier than Meliboean, or the grain
Of Sarra, worn by kings and heroes old
In time of truce; Iris had dipt the woof;
His starry helm unbuckled showed him prime
In manhood where youth ended; by his side,
As in a glistering zodiack, hung the sword,
Satan’s dire dread; and in his hand the spear.
Adam bowed low; he, kingly, from his state
Inclined not, but his coming thus declared.
Adam, Heaven’s high behest no preface needs:
Sufficient that thy prayers are heard; and Death,
Then due by sentence when thou didst transgress,
Defeated of his seisure many days
Given thee of grace; wherein thou mayest repent,
And one bad act with many deeds well done
Mayest cover: Well may then thy Lord, appeased,
Redeem thee quite from Death’s rapacious claim;
But longer in this Paradise to dwell
Permits not: to remove thee I am come,
And send thee from the garden forth to till
The ground whence thou wast taken, fitter soil.
He added not; for Adam at the news
Heart-struck with chilling gripe of sorrow stood,
That all his senses bound; Eve, who unseen
Yet all had heard, with audible lament
Discovered soon the place of her retire.
O unexpected stroke, worse than of Death!
Must I thus leave thee Paradise? thus leave
Thee, native soil! these happy walks and shades,
Fit haunt of Gods? where I had hope to spend,
Quiet though sad, the respite of that day
That must be mortal to us both. O flowers,
That never will in other climate grow,
My early visitation, and my last
At even, which I bred up with tender hand
From the first opening bud, and gave ye names,
Who now shall rear ye to the sun, or rank
Your tribes, and water from the ambrosial fount?
Thee lastly, nuptial bower! by me adorned
With what to sight or smell was sweet! from thee
How shall I part, and whither wander down
Into a lower world; to this obscure
And wild, how shall we breathe in other air
Less pure, accustomed to immortal fruits?
Whom thus the Angel interrupted mild.
Lament not, Eve, but patiently resign
What justly thou hast lost, nor set thy heart,
Thus over-fond, on that which is not thine:
Thy going is not lonely; with thee goes
Thy husband; whom to follow thou art bound;
Where he abides, think there thy native soil.
Adam, by this from the cold sudden damp
Recovering, and his scattered spirits returned,
To Michael thus his humble words addressed.
Celestial, whether among the Thrones, or named
Of them the highest; for such of shape may seem
Prince above princes! gently hast thou told
Thy message, which might else in telling wound,
And in performing end us; what besides
Of sorrow, and dejection, and despair,
Our frailty can sustain, thy tidings bring,
Departure from this happy place, our sweet
Recess, and only consolation left
Familiar to our eyes! all places else
Inhospitable appear, and desolate;
Nor knowing us, nor known: And, if by prayer
Incessant I could hope to change the will
Of Him who all things can, I would not cease
To weary him with my assiduous cries:
But prayer against his absolute decree
No more avails than breath against the wind,
Blown stifling back on him that breathes it forth:
Therefore to his great bidding I submit.
This most afflicts me, that, departing hence,
As from his face I shall be hid, deprived
His blessed countenance: Here I could frequent
With worship place by place where he vouchsafed
Presence Divine; and to my sons relate,
On this mount he appeared; under this tree
Stood visible; among these pines his voice
I heard; here with him at this fountain talked:
So many grateful altars I would rear
Of grassy turf, and pile up every stone
Of lustre from the brook, in memory,
Or monument to ages; and theron
Offer sweet-smelling gums, and fruits, and flowers:
In yonder nether world where shall I seek
His bright appearances, or foot-step trace?
For though I fled him angry, yet recalled
To life prolonged and promised race, I now
Gladly behold though but his utmost skirts
Of glory; and far off his steps adore.
To whom thus Michael with regard benign.
Adam, thou knowest Heaven his, and all the Earth;
Not this rock only; his Omnipresence fills
Land, sea, and air, and every kind that lives,
Fomented by his virtual power and warmed:
All the earth he gave thee to possess and rule,
No despicable gift; surmise not then
His presence to these narrow bounds confined
Of Paradise, or Eden: this had been
Perhaps thy capital seat, from whence had spread
All generations; and had hither come
From all the ends of the earth, to celebrate
And reverence thee, their great progenitor.
But this pre-eminence thou hast lost, brought down
To dwell on even ground now with thy sons:
Yet doubt not but in valley, and in plain,
God is, as here; and will be found alike
Present; and of his presence many a sign
Still following thee, still compassing thee round
With goodness and paternal love, his face
Express, and of his steps the track divine.
Which that thou mayest believe, and be confirmed
Ere thou from hence depart; know, I am sent
To show thee what shall come in future days
To thee, and to thy offspring: good with bad
Expect to hear; supernal grace contending
With sinfulness of men; thereby to learn
True patience, and to temper joy with fear
And pious sorrow; equally inured
By moderation either state to bear,
Prosperous or adverse: so shalt thou lead
Safest thy life, and best prepared endure
Thy mortal passage when it comes.—Ascend
This hill; let Eve (for I have drenched her eyes)
Here sleep below; while thou to foresight wakest;
As once thou sleptst, while she to life was formed.
To whom thus Adam gratefully replied.
Ascend, I follow thee, safe Guide, the path
Thou leadest me; and to the hand of Heaven submit,
However chastening; to the evil turn
My obvious breast; arming to overcome
By suffering, and earn rest from labour won,
If so I may attain.—So both ascend
In the visions of God. It was a hill,
Of Paradise the highest; from whose top
The hemisphere of earth, in clearest ken,
Stretched out to the amplest reach of prospect lay.
Not higher that hill, nor wider looking round,
Whereon, for different cause, the Tempter set
Our second Adam, in the wilderness;
To show him all Earth’s kingdoms, and their glory.
His eye might there command wherever stood
City of old or modern fame, the seat
Of mightiest empire, from the destined walls
Of Cambalu, seat of Cathaian Can,
And Samarchand by Oxus, Temir’s throne,
To Paquin of Sinaean kings; and thence
To Agra and Lahor of great Mogul,
Down to the golden Chersonese; or where
The Persian in Ecbatan sat, or since
In Hispahan; or where the Russian Ksar
In Mosco; or the Sultan in Bizance,
Turchestan-born; nor could his eye not ken
The empire of Negus to his utmost port
Ercoco, and the less maritim kings
Mombaza, and Quiloa, and Melind,
And Sofala, thought Ophir, to the realm
Of Congo, and Angola farthest south;
Or thence from Niger flood to Atlas mount
The kingdoms of Almansor, Fez and Sus,
Morocco, and Algiers, and Tremisen;
On Europe thence, and where Rome was to sway
The world: in spirit perhaps he also saw
Rich Mexico, the seat of Montezume,
And Cusco in Peru, the richer seat
Of Atabalipa; and yet unspoiled
Guiana, whose great city Geryon’s sons
Call El Dorado. But to nobler sights
Michael from Adam’s eyes the film removed,
Which that false fruit that promised clearer sight
Had bred; then purged with euphrasy and rue
The visual nerve, for he had much to see;
And from the well of life three drops instilled.
So deep the power of these ingredients pierced,
Even to the inmost seat of mental sight,
That Adam, now enforced to close his eyes,
Sunk down, and all his spirits became entranced;
But him the gentle Angel by the hand
Soon raised, and his attention thus recalled.
Adam, now ope thine eyes; and first behold
The effects, which thy original crime hath wrought
In some to spring from thee; who never touched
The excepted tree; nor with the snake conspired;
Nor sinned thy sin; yet from that sin derive
Corruption, to bring forth more violent deeds.
His eyes he opened, and beheld a field,
Part arable and tilth, whereon were sheaves
New reaped; the other part sheep-walks and folds;
I’ the midst an altar as the land-mark stood,
Rustick, of grassy sord; thither anon
A sweaty reaper from his tillage brought
First fruits, the green ear, and the yellow sheaf,
Unculled, as came to hand; a shepherd next,
More meek, came with the firstlings of his flock,
Choicest and best; then, sacrificing, laid
The inwards and their fat, with incense strowed,
On the cleft wood, and all due rights performed:
His offering soon propitious fire from Heaven
Consumed with nimble glance, and grateful steam;
The other’s not, for his was not sincere;
Whereat he inly raged, and, as they talked,
Smote him into the midriff with a stone
That beat out life; he fell; and, deadly pale,
Groaned out his soul with gushing blood effused.
Much at that sight was Adam in his heart
Dismayed, and thus in haste to the Angel cried.
O Teacher, some great mischief hath befallen
To that meek man, who well had sacrificed;
Is piety thus and pure devotion paid?
To whom Michael thus, he also moved, replied.
These two are brethren, Adam, and to come
Out of thy loins; the unjust the just hath slain,
For envy that his brother’s offering found
From Heaven acceptance; but the bloody fact
Will be avenged; and the other’s faith, approved,
Lose no reward; though here thou see him die,
Rolling in dust and gore. To which our sire.
Alas! both for the deed, and for the cause!
But have I now seen Death? Is this the way
I must return to native dust? O sight
Of terrour, foul and ugly to behold,
Horrid to think, how horrible to feel!
To whom thus Michael. Death thou hast seen
In his first shape on Man; but many shapes
Of Death, and many are the ways that lead
To his grim cave, all dismal; yet to sense
More terrible at the entrance, than within.
Some, as thou sawest, by violent stroke shall die;
By fire, flood, famine, by intemperance more
In meats and drinks, which on the earth shall bring
Diseases dire, of which a monstrous crew
Before thee shall appear; that thou mayest know
What misery the inabstinence of Eve
Shall bring on Men. Immediately a place
Before his eyes appeared, sad, noisome, dark;
A lazar-house it seemed; wherein were laid
Numbers of all diseased; all maladies
Of ghastly spasm, or racking torture, qualms
Of heart-sick agony, all feverous kinds,
Convulsions, epilepsies, fierce catarrhs,
Intestine stone and ulcer, colick-pangs,
Demoniack phrenzy, moaping melancholy,
And moon-struck madness, pining atrophy,
Marasmus, and wide-wasting pestilence,
Dropsies, and asthmas, and joint-racking rheums.
Dire was the tossing, deep the groans; Despair
Tended the sick busiest from couch to couch;
And over them triumphant Death his dart
Shook, but delayed to strike, though oft invoked
With vows, as their chief good, and final hope.
Sight so deform what heart of rock could long
Dry-eyed behold? Adam could not, but wept,
Though not of woman born; compassion quelled
His best of man, and gave him up to tears
A space, till firmer thoughts restrained excess;
And, scarce recovering words, his plaint renewed.
O miserable mankind, to what fall
Degraded, to what wretched state reserved!
Better end here unborn. Why is life given
To be thus wrested from us? rather, why
Obtruded on us thus? who, if we knew
What we receive, would either no accept
Life offered, or soon beg to lay it down;
Glad to be so dismissed in peace. Can thus
The image of God in Man, created once
So goodly and erect, though faulty since,
To such unsightly sufferings be debased
Under inhuman pains? Why should not Man,
Retaining still divine similitude
In part, from such deformities be free,
And, for his Maker’s image sake, exempt?
Their Maker’s image, answered Michael, then
Forsook them, when themselves they vilified
To serve ungoverned Appetite; and took
His image whom they served, a brutish vice,
Inductive mainly to the sin of Eve.
Therefore so abject is their punishment,
Disfiguring not God’s likeness, but their own;
Or if his likeness, by themselves defaced;
While they pervert pure Nature’s healthful rules
To loathsome sickness; worthily, since they
God’s image did not reverence in themselves.
I yield it just, said Adam, and submit.
But is there yet no other way, besides
These painful passages, how we may come
To death, and mix with our connatural dust?
There is, said Michael, if thou well observe
The rule of Not too much; by temperance taught,
In what thou eatest and drinkest; seeking from thence
Due nourishment, not gluttonous delight,
Till many years over thy head return:
So mayest thou live; till, like ripe fruit, thou drop
Into thy mother’s lap; or be with ease
Gathered, nor harshly plucked; for death mature:
This is Old Age; but then, thou must outlive
Thy youth, thy strength, thy beauty; which will change
To withered, weak, and gray; thy senses then,
Obtuse, all taste of pleasure must forego,
To what thou hast; and, for the air of youth,
Hopeful and cheerful, in thy blood will reign
A melancholy damp of cold and dry
To weigh thy spirits down, and last consume
The balm of life. To whom our ancestor.
Henceforth I fly not death, nor would prolong
Life much; bent rather, how I may be quit,
Fairest and easiest, of this cumbrous charge;
Which I must keep till my appointed day
Of rendering up, and patiently attend
My dissolution. Michael replied.
Nor love thy life, nor hate; but what thou livest
Live well; how long, or short, permit to Heaven:
And now prepare thee for another sight.
He looked, and saw a spacious plain, whereon
Were tents of various hue; by some, were herds
Of cattle grazing; others, whence the sound
Of instruments, that made melodious chime,
Was heard, of harp and organ; and, who moved
Their stops and chords, was seen; his volant touch,
Instinct through all proportions, low and high,
Fled and pursued transverse the resonant fugue.
In other part stood one who, at the forge
Labouring, two massy clods of iron and brass
Had melted, (whether found where casual fire
Had wasted woods on mountain or in vale,
Down to the veins of earth; thence gliding hot
To some cave’s mouth; or whether washed by stream
From underground;) the liquid ore he drained
Into fit moulds prepared; from which he formed
First his own tools; then, what might else be wrought
Fusil or graven in metal. After these,
But on the hither side, a different sort
From the high neighbouring hills, which was their seat,
Down to the plain descended; by their guise
Just men they seemed, and all their study bent
To worship God aright, and know his works
Not hid; nor those things last, which might preserve
Freedom and peace to Men; they on the plain
Long had not walked, when from the tents, behold!
A bevy of fair women, richly gay
In gems and wanton dress; to the harp they sung
Soft amorous ditties, and in dance came on:
The men, though grave, eyed them; and let their eyes
Rove without rein; till, in the amorous net
Fast caught, they liked; and each his liking chose;
And now of love they treat, till the evening-star,
Love’s harbinger, appeared; then, all in heat
They light the nuptial torch, and bid invoke
Hymen, then first to marriage rites invoked:
With feast and musick all the tents resound.
Such happy interview, and fair event
Of love and youth not lost, songs, garlands, flowers,
And charming symphonies, attached the heart
Of Adam, soon inclined to admit delight,
The bent of nature; which he thus expressed.
True opener of mine eyes, prime Angel blest;
Much better seems this vision, and more hope
Of peaceful days portends, than those two past;
Those were of hate and death, or pain much worse;
Here Nature seems fulfilled in all her ends.
To whom thus Michael. Judge not what is best
By pleasure, though to nature seeming meet;
Created, as thou art, to nobler end
Holy and pure, conformity divine.
Those tents thou sawest so pleasant, were the tents
Of wickedness, wherein shall dwell his race
Who slew his brother; studious they appear
Of arts that polish life, inventers rare;
Unmindful of their Maker, though his Spirit
Taught them; but they his gifts acknowledged none.
Yet they a beauteous offspring shall beget;
For that fair female troop thou sawest, that seemed
Of Goddesses, so blithe, so smooth, so gay,
Yet empty of all good wherein consists
Woman’s domestick honour and chief praise;
Bred only and completed to the taste
Of lustful appetence, to sing, to dance,
To dress, and troll the tongue, and roll the eye:
To these that sober race of men, whose lives
Religious titled them the sons of God,
Shall yield up all their virtue, all their fame
Ignobly, to the trains and to the smiles
Of these fair atheists; and now swim in joy,
Erelong to swim at large; and laugh, for which
The world erelong a world of tears must weep.
To whom thus Adam, of short joy bereft.
O pity and shame, that they, who to live well
Entered so fair, should turn aside to tread
Paths indirect, or in the mid way faint!
But still I see the tenour of Man’s woe
Holds on the same, from Woman to begin.
From Man’s effeminate slackness it begins,
Said the Angel, who should better hold his place
By wisdom, and superiour gifts received.
But now prepare thee for another scene.
He looked, and saw wide territory spread
Before him, towns, and rural works between;
Cities of men with lofty gates and towers,
Concourse in arms, fierce faces threatening war,
Giants of mighty bone and bold emprise;
Part wield their arms, part curb the foaming steed,
Single or in array of battle ranged
Both horse and foot, nor idly mustering stood;
One way a band select from forage drives
A herd of beeves, fair oxen and fair kine,
From a fat meadow ground; or fleecy flock,
Ewes and their bleating lambs over the plain,
Their booty; scarce with life the shepherds fly,
But call in aid, which makes a bloody fray;
With cruel tournament the squadrons join;
Where cattle pastured late, now scattered lies
With carcasses and arms the ensanguined field,
Deserted: Others to a city strong
Lay siege, encamped; by battery, scale, and mine,
Assaulting; others from the wall defend
With dart and javelin, stones, and sulphurous fire;
On each hand slaughter, and gigantick deeds.
In other part the sceptered heralds call
To council, in the city-gates; anon
Gray-headed men and grave, with warriours mixed,
Assemble, and harangues are heard; but soon,
In factious opposition; till at last,
Of middle age one rising, eminent
In wise deport, spake much of right and wrong,
Of justice, or religion, truth, and peace,
And judgement from above: him old and young
Exploded, and had seized with violent hands,
Had not a cloud descending snatched him thence
Unseen amid the throng: so violence
Proceeded, and oppression, and sword-law,
Through all the plain, and refuge none was found.
Adam was all in tears, and to his guide
Lamenting turned full sad; O! what are these,
Death’s ministers, not men? who thus deal death
Inhumanly to men, and multiply
Ten thousandfold the sin of him who slew
His brother: for of whom such massacre
Make they, but of their brethren; men of men
But who was that just man, whom had not Heaven
Rescued, had in his righteousness been lost?
To whom thus Michael. These are the product
Of those ill-mated marriages thou sawest;
Where good with bad were matched, who of themselves
Abhor to join; and, by imprudence mixed,
Produce prodigious births of body or mind.
Such were these giants, men of high renown;
For in those days might only shall be admired,
And valour and heroick virtue called;
To overcome in battle, and subdue
Nations, and bring home spoils with infinite
Man-slaughter, shall be held the highest pitch
Of human glory; and for glory done
Of triumph, to be styled great conquerours
Patrons of mankind, Gods, and sons of Gods;
Destroyers rightlier called, and plagues of men.
Thus fame shall be achieved, renown on earth;
And what most merits fame, in silence hid.
But he, the seventh from thee, whom thou beheldst
The only righteous in a world preverse,
And therefore hated, therefore so beset
With foes, for daring single to be just,
And utter odious truth, that God would come
To judge them with his Saints; him the Most High
Rapt in a balmy cloud with winged steeds
Did, as thou sawest, receive, to walk with God
High in salvation and the climes of bliss,
Exempt from death; to show thee what reward
Awaits the good; the rest what punishment;
Which now direct thine eyes and soon behold.
He looked, and saw the face of things quite changed;
The brazen throat of war had ceased to roar;
All now was turned to jollity and game,
To luxury and riot, feast and dance;
Marrying or prostituting, as befel,
Rape or adultery, where passing fair
Allured them; thence from cups to civil broils.
At length a reverend sire among them came,
And of their doings great dislike declared,
And testified against their ways; he oft
Frequented their assemblies, whereso met,
Triumphs or festivals; and to them preached
Conversion and repentance, as to souls
In prison, under judgements imminent:
But all in vain: which when he saw, he ceased
Contending, and removed his tents far off;
Then, from the mountain hewing timber tall,
Began to build a vessel of huge bulk;
Measured by cubit, length, and breadth, and highth;
Smeared round with pitch; and in the side a door
Contrived; and of provisions laid in large,
For man and beast: when lo, a wonder strange!
Of every beast, and bird, and insect small,
Came sevens, and pairs; and entered in as taught
Their order: last the sire and his three sons,
With their four wives; and God made fast the door.
Mean while the south-wind rose, and, with black wings
Wide-hovering, all the clouds together drove
From under Heaven; the hills to their supply
Vapour, and exhalation dusk and moist,
Sent up amain; and now the thickened sky
Like a dark ceiling stood; down rushed the rain
Impetuous; and continued, till the earth
No more was seen: the floating vessel swum
Uplifted, and secure with beaked prow
Rode tilting o’er the waves; all dwellings else
Flood overwhelmed, and them with all their pomp
Deep under water rolled; sea covered sea,
Sea without shore; and in their palaces,
Where luxury late reigned, sea-monsters whelped
And stabled; of mankind, so numerous late,
All left, in one small bottom swum imbarked.
How didst thou grieve then, Adam, to behold
The end of all thy offspring, end so sad,
Depopulation! Thee another flood,
Of tears and sorrow a flood, thee also drowned,
And sunk thee as thy sons; till, gently reared
By the Angel, on thy feet thou stoodest at last,
Though comfortless; as when a father mourns
His children, all in view destroyed at once;
And scarce to the Angel utter’dst thus thy plaint.
O visions ill foreseen! Better had I
Lived ignorant of future! so had borne
My part of evil only, each day’s lot
Enough to bear; those now, that were dispensed
The burden of many ages, on me light
At once, by my foreknowledge gaining birth
Abortive, to torment me ere their being,
With thought that they must be. Let no man seek
Henceforth to be foretold, what shall befall
Him or his children; evil he may be sure,
Which neither his foreknowing can prevent;
And he the future evil shall no less
In apprehension than in substance feel,
Grievous to bear: but that care now is past,
Man is not whom to warn: those few escaped
Famine and anguish will at last consume,
Wandering that watery desart: I had hope,
When violence was ceased, and war on earth,
All would have then gone well; peace would have crowned
With length of happy days the race of Man;
But I was far deceived; for now I see
Peace to corrupt no less than war to waste.
How comes it thus? unfold, celestial Guide,
And whether here the race of Man will end.
To whom thus Michael. Those, whom last thou sawest
In triumph and luxurious wealth, are they
First seen in acts of prowess eminent
And great exploits, but of true virtue void;
Who, having spilt much blood, and done much wast
Subduing nations, and achieved thereby
Fame in the world, high titles, and rich prey;
Shall change their course to pleasure, ease, and sloth,
Surfeit, and lust; till wantonness and pride
Raise out of friendship hostile deeds in peace.
The conquered also, and enslaved by war,
Shall, with their freedom lost, all virtue lose
And fear of God; from whom their piety feigned
In sharp contest of battle found no aid
Against invaders; therefore, cooled in zeal,
Thenceforth shall practice how to live secure,
Worldly or dissolute, on what their lords
Shall leave them to enjoy; for the earth shall bear
More than enough, that temperance may be tried:
So all shall turn degenerate, all depraved;
Justice and temperance, truth and faith, forgot;
One man except, the only son of light
In a dark age, against example good,
Against allurement, custom, and a world
Offended: fearless of reproach and scorn,
Or violence, he of their wicked ways
Shall them admonish; and before them set
The paths of righteousness, how much more safe
And full of peace; denouncing wrath to come
On their impenitence; and shall return
Of them derided, but of God observed
The one just man alive; by his command
Shall build a wonderous ark, as thou beheldst,
To save himself, and houshold, from amidst
A world devote to universal wrack.
No sooner he, with them of man and beast
Select for life, shall in the ark be lodged,
And sheltered round; but all the cataracts
Of Heaven set open on the Earth shall pour
Rain, day and night; all fountains of the deep,
Broke up, shall heave the ocean to usurp
Beyond all bounds; till inundation rise
Above the highest hills: Then shall this mount
Of Paradise by might of waves be moved
Out of his place, pushed by the horned flood,
With all his verdure spoiled, and trees adrift,
Down the great river to the opening gulf,
And there take root an island salt and bare,
The haunt of seals, and orcs, and sea-mews’ clang:
To teach thee that God attributes to place
No sanctity, if none be thither brought
By men who there frequent, or therein dwell.
And now, what further shall ensue, behold.
He looked, and saw the ark hull on the flood,
Which now abated; for the clouds were fled,
Driven by a keen north-wind, that, blowing dry,
Wrinkled the face of deluge, as decayed;
And the clear sun on his wide watery glass
Gazed hot, and of the fresh wave largely drew,
As after thirst; which made their flowing shrink
From standing lake to tripping ebb, that stole
With soft foot towards the deep; who now had stopt
His sluces, as the Heaven his windows shut.
The ark no more now floats, but seems on ground,
Fast on the top of some high mountain fixed.
And now the tops of hills, as rocks, appear;
With clamour thence the rapid currents drive,
Towards the retreating sea, their furious tide.
Forthwith from out the ark a raven flies,
And after him, the surer messenger,
A dove sent forth once and again to spy
Green tree or ground, whereon his foot may light:
The second time returning, in his bill
An olive-leaf he brings, pacifick sign:
Anon dry ground appears, and from his ark
The ancient sire descends, with all his train;
Then with uplifted hands, and eyes devout,
Grateful to Heaven, over his head beholds
A dewy cloud, and in the cloud a bow
Conspicuous with three lifted colours gay,
Betokening peace from God, and covenant new.
Whereat the heart of Adam, erst so sad,
Greatly rejoiced; and thus his joy broke forth.
O thou, who future things canst represent
As present, heavenly Instructer! I revive
At this last sight; assured that Man shall live,
With all the creatures, and their seed preserve.
Far less I now lament for one whole world
Of wicked sons destroyed, than I rejoice
For one man found so perfect, and so just,
That God vouchsafes to raise another world
From him, and all his anger to forget.
But say, what mean those coloured streaks in Heaven
Distended, as the brow of God appeased?
Or serve they, as a flowery verge, to bind
The fluid skirts of that same watery cloud,
Lest it again dissolve, and shower the earth?
To whom the Arch-Angel. Dextrously thou aimest;
So willingly doth God remit his ire,
Though late repenting him of Man depraved;
Grieved at his heart, when looking down he saw
The whole earth filled with violence, and all flesh
Corrupting each their way; yet, those removed,
Such grace shall one just man find in his sight,
That he relents, not to blot out mankind;
And makes a covenant never to destroy
The earth again by flood; nor let the sea
Surpass his bounds; nor rain to drown the world,
With man therein or beast; but, when he brings
Over the earth a cloud, will therein set
His triple-coloured bow, whereon to look,
And call to mind his covenant: Day and night,
Seed-time and harvest, heat and hoary frost,
Shall hold their course; till fire purge all things new,
Both Heaven and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell.







As one who in his journey bates at noon,
Though bent on speed; so here the Arch-Angel paused
Betwixt the world destroyed and world restored,
If Adam aught perhaps might interpose;
Then, with transition sweet, new speech resumes.
Thus thou hast seen one world begin, and end;
And Man, as from a second stock, proceed.
Much thou hast yet to see; but I perceive
Thy mortal sight to fail; objects divine
Must needs impair and weary human sense:
Henceforth what is to come I will relate;
Thou therefore give due audience, and attend.
This second source of Men, while yet but few,
And while the dread of judgement past remains
Fresh in their minds, fearing the Deity,
With some regard to what is just and right
Shall lead their lives, and multiply apace;
Labouring the soil, and reaping plenteous crop,
Corn, wine, and oil; and, from the herd or flock,
Oft sacrificing bullock, lamb, or kid,
With large wine-offerings poured, and sacred feast,
Shall spend their days in joy unblamed; and dwell
Long time in peace, by families and tribes,
Under paternal rule: till one shall rise
Of proud ambitious heart; who, not content
With fair equality, fraternal state,
Will arrogate dominion undeserved
Over his brethren, and quite dispossess
Concord and law of nature from the earth;
Hunting (and men not beasts shall be his game)
With war, and hostile snare, such as refuse
Subjection to his empire tyrannous:
A mighty hunter thence he shall be styled
Before the Lord; as in despite of Heaven,
Or from Heaven, claiming second sovranty;
And from rebellion shall derive his name,
Though of rebellion others he accuse.
He with a crew, whom like ambition joins
With him or under him to tyrannize,
Marching from Eden towards the west, shall find
The plain, wherein a black bituminous gurge
Boils out from under ground, the mouth of Hell:
Of brick, and of that stuff, they cast to build
A city and tower, whose top may reach to Heaven;
And get themselves a name; lest, far dispersed
In foreign lands, their memory be lost;
Regardless whether good or evil fame.
But God, who oft descends to visit men
Unseen, and through their habitations walks
To mark their doings, them beholding soon,
Comes down to see their city, ere the tower
Obstruct Heaven-towers, and in derision sets
Upon their tongues a various spirit, to rase
Quite out their native language; and, instead,
To sow a jangling noise of words unknown:
Forthwith a hideous gabble rises loud,
Among the builders; each to other calls
Not understood; till hoarse, and all in rage,
As mocked they storm: great laughter was in Heaven,
And looking down, to see the hubbub strange,
And hear the din: Thus was the building left
Ridiculous, and the work Confusion named.
Whereto thus Adam, fatherly displeased.
O execrable son! so to aspire
Above his brethren; to himself assuming
Authority usurped, from God not given:
He gave us only over beast, fish, fowl,
Dominion absolute; that right we hold
By his donation; but man over men
He made not lord; such title to himself
Reserving, human left from human free.
But this usurper his encroachment proud
Stays not on Man; to God his tower intends
Siege and defiance: Wretched man! what food
Will he convey up thither, to sustain
Himself and his rash army; where thin air
Above the clouds will pine his entrails gross,
And famish him of breath, if not of bread?
To whom thus Michael. Justly thou abhorrest
That son, who on the quiet state of men
Such trouble brought, affecting to subdue
Rational liberty; yet know withal,
Since thy original lapse, true liberty
Is lost, which always with right reason dwells
Twinned, and from her hath no dividual being:
Reason in man obscured, or not obeyed,
Immediately inordinate desires,
And upstart passions, catch the government
From reason; and to servitude reduce
Man, till then free. Therefore, since he permits
Within himself unworthy powers to reign
Over free reason, God, in judgement just,
Subjects him from without to violent lords;
Who oft as undeservedly enthrall
His outward freedom: Tyranny must be;
Though to the tyrant thereby no excuse.
Yet sometimes nations will decline so low
From virtue, which is reason, that no wrong,
But justice, and some fatal curse annexed,
Deprives them of their outward liberty;
Their inward lost: Witness the irreverent son
Of him who built the ark; who, for the shame
Done to his father, heard this heavy curse,
Servant of servants, on his vicious race.
Thus will this latter, as the former world,
Still tend from bad to worse; till God at last,
Wearied with their iniquities, withdraw
His presence from among them, and avert
His holy eyes; resolving from thenceforth
To leave them to their own polluted ways;
And one peculiar nation to select
From all the rest, of whom to be invoked,
A nation from one faithful man to spring:
Him on this side Euphrates yet residing,
Bred up in idol-worship: O, that men
(Canst thou believe?) should be so stupid grown,
While yet the patriarch lived, who ’scaped the flood,
As to forsake the living God, and fall
To worship their own work in wood and stone
For Gods! Yet him God the Most High vouchsafes
To call by vision, from his father’s house,
His kindred, and false Gods, into a land
Which he will show him; and from him will raise
A mighty nation; and upon him shower
His benediction so, that in his seed
All nations shall be blest: he straight obeys;
Not knowing to what land, yet firm believes:
I see him, but thou canst not, with what faith
He leaves his Gods, his friends, and native soil,
Ur of Chaldaea, passing now the ford
To Haran; after him a cumbrous train
Of herds and flocks, and numerous servitude;
Not wandering poor, but trusting all his wealth
With God, who called him, in a land unknown.
Canaan he now attains; I see his tents
Pitched about Sechem, and the neighbouring plain
Of Moreh; there by promise he receives
Gift to his progeny of all that land,
From Hameth northward to the Desart south;
(Things by their names I call, though yet unnamed;)
From Hermon east to the great western Sea;
Mount Hermon, yonder sea; each place behold
In prospect, as I point them; on the shore
Mount Carmel; here, the double-founted stream,
Jordan, true limit eastward; but his sons
Shall dwell to Senir, that long ridge of hills.
This ponder, that all nations of the earth
Shall in his seed be blessed: By that seed
Is meant thy great Deliverer, who shall bruise
The Serpent’s head; whereof to thee anon
Plainlier shall be revealed. This patriarch blest,
Whom faithful Abraham due time shall call,
A son, and of his son a grand-child, leaves;
Like him in faith, in wisdom, and renown:
The grandchild, with twelve sons increased, departs
From Canaan to a land hereafter called
Egypt, divided by the river Nile
See where it flows, disgorging at seven mouths
Into the sea. To sojourn in that land
He comes, invited by a younger son
In time of dearth, a son whose worthy deeds
Raise him to be the second in that realm
Of Pharaoh. There he dies, and leaves his race
Growing into a nation, and now grown
Suspected to a sequent king, who seeks
To stop their overgrowth, as inmate guests
Too numerous; whence of guests he makes them slaves
Inhospitably, and kills their infant males:
Till by two brethren (these two brethren call
Moses and Aaron) sent from God to claim
His people from enthralment, they return,
With glory and spoil, back to their promised land.
But first, the lawless tyrant, who denies
To know their God, or message to regard,
Must be compelled by signs and judgements dire;
To blood unshed the rivers must be turned;
Frogs, lice, and flies, must all his palace fill
With loathed intrusion, and fill all the land;
His cattle must of rot and murren die;
Botches and blains must all his flesh emboss,
And all his people; thunder mixed with hail,
Hail mixed with fire, must rend the Egyptians sky,
And wheel on the earth, devouring where it rolls;
What it devours not, herb, or fruit, or grain,
A darksome cloud of locusts swarming down
Must eat, and on the ground leave nothing green;
Darkness must overshadow all his bounds,
Palpable darkness, and blot out three days;
Last, with one midnight stroke, all the first-born
Of Egypt must lie dead. Thus with ten wounds
The river-dragon tamed at length submits
To let his sojourners depart, and oft
Humbles his stubborn heart; but still, as ice
More hardened after thaw; till, in his rage
Pursuing whom he late dismissed, the sea
Swallows him with his host; but them lets pass,
As on dry land, between two crystal walls;
Awed by the rod of Moses so to stand
Divided, till his rescued gain their shore:
Such wondrous power God to his saint will lend,
Though present in his Angel; who shall go
Before them in a cloud, and pillar of fire;
By day a cloud, by night a pillar of fire;
To guide them in their journey, and remove
Behind them, while the obdurate king pursues:
All night he will pursue; but his approach
Darkness defends between till morning watch;
Then through the fiery pillar, and the cloud,
God looking forth will trouble all his host,
And craze their chariot-wheels: when by command
Moses once more his potent rod extends
Over the sea; the sea his rod obeys;
On their embattled ranks the waves return,
And overwhelm their war: The race elect
Safe toward Canaan from the shore advance
Through the wild Desart, not the readiest way;
Lest, entering on the Canaanite alarmed,
War terrify them inexpert, and fear
Return them back to Egypt, choosing rather
Inglorious life with servitude; for life
To noble and ignoble is more sweet
Untrained in arms, where rashness leads not on.
This also shall they gain by their delay
In the wide wilderness; there they shall found
Their government, and their great senate choose
Through the twelve tribes, to rule by laws ordained:
God from the mount of Sinai, whose gray top
Shall tremble, he descending, will himself
In thunder, lightning, and loud trumpets’ sound,
Ordain them laws; part, such as appertain
To civil justice; part, religious rites
Of sacrifice; informing them, by types
And shadows, of that destined Seed to bruise
The Serpent, by what means he shall achieve
Mankind’s deliverance. But the voice of God
To mortal ear is dreadful: They beseech
That Moses might report to them his will,
And terrour cease; he grants what they besought,
Instructed that to God is no access
Without Mediator, whose high office now
Moses in figure bears; to introduce
One greater, of whose day he shall foretel,
And all the Prophets in their age the times
Of great Messiah shall sing. Thus, laws and rites
Established, such delight hath God in Men
Obedient to his will, that he vouchsafes
Among them to set up his tabernacle;
The Holy One with mortal Men to dwell:
By his prescript a sanctuary is framed
Of cedar, overlaid with gold; therein
An ark, and in the ark his testimony,
The records of his covenant; over these
A mercy-seat of gold, between the wings
Of two bright Cherubim; before him burn
Seven lamps as in a zodiack representing
The heavenly fires; over the tent a cloud
Shall rest by day, a fiery gleam by night;
Save when they journey, and at length they come,
Conducted by his Angel, to the land
Promised to Abraham and his seed:—The rest
Were long to tell; how many battles fought
How many kings destroyed; and kingdoms won;
Or how the sun shall in mid Heaven stand still
A day entire, and night’s due course adjourn,
Man’s voice commanding, “Sun, in Gibeon stand,
And thou moon in the vale of Aialon,
Till Israel overcome!” so call the third
From Abraham, son of Isaac; and from him
His whole descent, who thus shall Canaan win.
Here Adam interposed. O sent from Heaven,
Enlightener of my darkness, gracious things
Thou hast revealed; those chiefly, which concern
Just Abraham and his seed: now first I find
Mine eyes true-opening, and my heart much eased;
Erewhile perplexed with thoughts, what would become
Of me and all mankind: But now I see
His day, in whom all nations shall be blest;
Favour unmerited by me, who sought
Forbidden knowledge by forbidden means.
This yet I apprehend not, why to those
Among whom God will deign to dwell on earth
So many and so various laws are given;
So many laws argue so many sins
Among them; how can God with such reside?
To whom thus Michael. Doubt not but that sin
Will reign among them, as of thee begot;
And therefore was law given them, to evince
Their natural pravity, by stirring up
Sin against law to fight: that when they see
Law can discover sin, but not remove,
Save by those shadowy expiations weak,
The blood of bulls and goats, they may conclude
Some blood more precious must be paid for Man;
Just for unjust; that, in such righteousness
To them by faith imputed, they may find
Justification towards God, and peace
Of conscience; which the law by ceremonies
Cannot appease; nor Man the mortal part
Perform; and, not performing, cannot live.
So law appears imperfect; and but given
With purpose to resign them, in full time,
Up to a better covenant; disciplined
From shadowy types to truth; from flesh to spirit;
From imposition of strict laws to free
Acceptance of large grace; from servile fear
To filial; works of law to works of faith.
And therefore shall not Moses, though of God
Highly beloved, being but the minister
Of law, his people into Canaan lead;
But Joshua, whom the Gentiles Jesus call,
His name and office bearing, who shall quell
The adversary-Serpent, and bring back
Through the world’s wilderness long-wandered Man
Safe to eternal Paradise of rest.
Mean while they, in their earthly Canaan placed,
Long time shall dwell and prosper, but when sins
National interrupt their publick peace,
Provoking God to raise them enemies;
From whom as oft he saves them penitent
By Judges first, then under Kings; of whom
The second, both for piety renowned
And puissant deeds, a promise shall receive
Irrevocable, that his regal throne
For ever shall endure; the like shall sing
All Prophecy, that of the royal stock
Of David (so I name this king) shall rise
A Son, the Woman’s seed to thee foretold,
Foretold to Abraham, as in whom shall trust
All nations; and to kings foretold, of kings
The last; for of his reign shall be no end.
But first, a long succession must ensue;
And his next son, for wealth and wisdom famed,
The clouded ark of God, till then in tents
Wandering, shall in a glorious temple enshrine.
Such follow him, as shall be registered
Part good, part bad; of bad the longer scroll;
Whose foul idolatries, and other faults
Heaped to the popular sum, will so incense
God, as to leave them, and expose their land,
Their city, his temple, and his holy ark,
With all his sacred things, a scorn and prey
To that proud city, whose high walls thou sawest
Left in confusion; Babylon thence called.
There in captivity he lets them dwell
The space of seventy years; then brings them back,
Remembering mercy, and his covenant sworn
To David, stablished as the days of Heaven.
Returned from Babylon by leave of kings
Their lords, whom God disposed, the house of God
They first re-edify; and for a while
In mean estate live moderate; till, grown
In wealth and multitude, factious they grow;
But first among the priests dissention springs,
Men who attend the altar, and should most
Endeavour peace: their strife pollution brings
Upon the temple itself: at last they seise
The scepter, and regard not David’s sons;
Then lose it to a stranger, that the true
Anointed King Messiah might be born
Barred of his right; yet at his birth a star,
Unseen before in Heaven, proclaims him come;
And guides the eastern sages, who inquire
His place, to offer incense, myrrh, and gold:
His place of birth a solemn Angel tells
To simple shepherds, keeping watch by night;
They gladly thither haste, and by a quire
Of squadroned Angels hear his carol sung.
A virgin is his mother, but his sire
The power of the Most High: He shall ascend
The throne hereditary, and bound his reign
With Earth’s wide bounds, his glory with the Heavens.
He ceased, discerning Adam with such joy
Surcharged, as had like grief been dewed in tears,
Without the vent of words; which these he breathed.
O prophet of glad tidings, finisher
Of utmost hope! now clear I understand
What oft my steadiest thoughts have searched in vain;
Why our great Expectation should be called
The seed of Woman: Virgin Mother, hail,
High in the love of Heaven; yet from my loins
Thou shalt proceed, and from thy womb the Son
Of God Most High: so God with Man unites!
Needs must the Serpent now his capital bruise
Expect with mortal pain: Say where and when
Their fight, what stroke shall bruise the victor’s heel.
To whom thus Michael. Dream not of their fight,
As of a duel, or the local wounds
Of head or heel: Not therefore joins the Son
Manhood to Godhead, with more strength to foil
Thy enemy; nor so is overcome
Satan, whose fall from Heaven, a deadlier bruise,
Disabled, not to give thee thy death’s wound:
Which he, who comes thy Saviour, shall recure,
Not by destroying Satan, but his works
In thee, and in thy seed: Nor can this be,
But by fulfilling that which thou didst want,
Obedience to the law of God, imposed
On penalty of death, and suffering death;
The penalty to thy transgression due,
And due to theirs which out of thine will grow:
So only can high Justice rest appaid.
The law of God exact he shall fulfil
Both by obedience and by love, though love
Alone fulfil the law; thy punishment
He shall endure, by coming in the flesh
To a reproachful life, and cursed death;
Proclaiming life to all who shall believe
In his redemption; and that his obedience,
Imputed, becomes theirs by faith; his merits
To save them, not their own, though legal, works.
For this he shall live hated, be blasphemed,
Seised on by force, judged, and to death condemned
A shameful and accursed, nailed to the cross
By his own nation; slain for bringing life:
But to the cross he nails thy enemies,
The law that is against thee, and the sins
Of all mankind, with him there crucified,
Never to hurt them more who rightly trust
In this his satisfaction; so he dies,
But soon revives; Death over him no power
Shall long usurp; ere the third dawning light
Return, the stars of morn shall see him rise
Out of his grave, fresh as the dawning light,
Thy ransom paid, which Man from death redeems,
His death for Man, as many as offered life
Neglect not, and the benefit embrace
By faith not void of works: This God-like act
Annuls thy doom, the death thou shouldest have died,
In sin for ever lost from life; this act
Shall bruise the head of Satan, crush his strength,
Defeating Sin and Death, his two main arms;
And fix far deeper in his head their stings
Than temporal death shall bruise the victor’s heel,
Or theirs whom he redeems; a death, like sleep,
A gentle wafting to immortal life.
Nor after resurrection shall he stay
Longer on earth, than certain times to appear
To his disciples, men who in his life
Still followed him; to them shall leave in charge
To teach all nations what of him they learned
And his salvation; them who shall believe
Baptizing in the profluent stream, the sign
Of washing them from guilt of sin to life
Pure, and in mind prepared, if so befall,
For death, like that which the Redeemer died.
All nations they shall teach; for, from that day,
Not only to the sons of Abraham’s loins
Salvation shall be preached, but to the sons
Of Abraham’s faith wherever through the world;
So in his seed all nations shall be blest.
Then to the Heaven of Heavens he shall ascend
With victory, triumphing through the air
Over his foes and thine; there shall surprise
The Serpent, prince of air, and drag in chains
Through all his realm, and there confounded leave;
Then enter into glory, and resume
His seat at God’s right hand, exalted high
Above all names in Heaven; and thence shall come,
When this world’s dissolution shall be ripe,
With glory and power to judge both quick and dead;
To judge the unfaithful dead, but to reward
His faithful, and receive them into bliss,
Whether in Heaven or Earth; for then the Earth
Shall all be Paradise, far happier place
Than this of Eden, and far happier days.
So spake the Arch-Angel Michael; then paused,
As at the world’s great period; and our sire,
Replete with joy and wonder, thus replied.
O Goodness infinite, Goodness immense!
That all this good of evil shall produce,
And evil turn to good; more wonderful
Than that which by creation first brought forth
Light out of darkness! Full of doubt I stand,
Whether I should repent me now of sin
By me done, and occasioned; or rejoice
Much more, that much more good thereof shall spring;
To God more glory, more good-will to Men
From God, and over wrath grace shall abound.
But say, if our Deliverer up to Heaven
Must re-ascend, what will betide the few
His faithful, left among the unfaithful herd,
The enemies of truth? Who then shall guide
His people, who defend? Will they not deal
Worse with his followers than with him they dealt?
Be sure they will, said the Angel; but from Heaven
He to his own a Comforter will send,
The promise of the Father, who shall dwell
His Spirit within them; and the law of faith,
Working through love, upon their hearts shall write,
To guide them in all truth; and also arm
With spiritual armour, able to resist
Satan’s assaults, and quench his fiery darts;
What man can do against them, not afraid,
Though to the death; against such cruelties
With inward consolations recompensed,
And oft supported so as shall amaze
Their proudest persecutors: For the Spirit,
Poured first on his Apostles, whom he sends
To evangelize the nations, then on all
Baptized, shall them with wonderous gifts endue
To speak all tongues, and do all miracles,
As did their Lord before them. Thus they win
Great numbers of each nation to receive
With joy the tidings brought from Heaven: At length
Their ministry performed, and race well run,
Their doctrine and their story written left,
They die; but in their room, as they forewarn,
Wolves shall succeed for teachers, grievous wolves,
Who all the sacred mysteries of Heaven
To their own vile advantages shall turn
Of lucre and ambition; and the truth
With superstitions and traditions taint,
Left only in those written records pure,
Though not but by the Spirit understood.
Then shall they seek to avail themselves of names,
Places, and titles, and with these to join
Secular power; though feigning still to act
By spiritual, to themselves appropriating
The Spirit of God, promised alike and given
To all believers; and, from that pretence,
Spiritual laws by carnal power shall force
On every conscience; laws which none shall find
Left them inrolled, or what the Spirit within
Shall on the heart engrave. What will they then
But force the Spirit of Grace itself, and bind
His consort Liberty? what, but unbuild
His living temples, built by faith to stand,
Their own faith, not another’s? for, on earth,
Who against faith and conscience can be heard
Infallible? yet many will presume:
Whence heavy persecution shall arise
On all, who in the worship persevere
Of spirit and truth; the rest, far greater part,
Will deem in outward rites and specious forms
Religion satisfied; Truth shall retire
Bestuck with slanderous darts, and works of faith
Rarely be found: So shall the world go on,
To good malignant, to bad men benign;
Under her own weight groaning; till the day
Appear of respiration to the just,
And vengeance to the wicked, at return
Of him so lately promised to thy aid,
The Woman’s Seed; obscurely then foretold,
Now ampler known thy Saviour and thy Lord;
Last, in the clouds, from Heaven to be revealed
In glory of the Father, to dissolve
Satan with his perverted world; then raise
From the conflagrant mass, purged and refined,
New Heavens, new Earth, ages of endless date,
Founded in righteousness, and peace, and love;
To bring forth fruits, joy and eternal bliss.
He ended; and thus Adam last replied.
How soon hath thy prediction, Seer blest,
Measured this transient world, the race of time,
Till time stand fixed! Beyond is all abyss,
Eternity, whose end no eye can reach.
Greatly-instructed I shall hence depart;
Greatly in peace of thought; and have my fill
Of knowledge, what this vessel can contain;
Beyond which was my folly to aspire.
Henceforth I learn, that to obey is best,
And love with fear the only God; to walk
As in his presence; ever to observe
His providence; and on him sole depend,
Merciful over all his works, with good
Still overcoming evil, and by small
Accomplishing great things, by things deemed weak
Subverting worldly strong, and worldly wise
By simply meek: that suffering for truth’s sake
Is fortitude to highest victory,
And, to the faithful, death the gate of life;
Taught this by his example, whom I now
Acknowledge my Redeemer ever blest.
To whom thus also the Angel last replied.
This having learned, thou hast attained the sum
Of wisdom; hope no higher, though all the stars
Thou knewest by name, and all the ethereal powers,
All secrets of the deep, all Nature’s works,
Or works of God in Heaven, air, earth, or sea,
And all the riches of this world enjoyedst,
And all the rule, one empire; only add
Deeds to thy knowledge answerable; add faith,
Add virtue, patience, temperance; add love,
By name to come called charity, the soul
Of all the rest: then wilt thou not be loth
To leave this Paradise, but shalt possess
A Paradise within thee, happier far.—
Let us descend now therefore from this top
Of speculation; for the hour precise
Exacts our parting hence; and see the guards,
By me encamped on yonder hill, expect
Their motion; at whose front a flaming sword,
In signal of remove, waves fiercely round:
We may no longer stay: go, waken Eve;
Her also I with gentle dreams have calmed
Portending good, and all her spirits composed
To meek submission: thou, at season fit,
Let her with thee partake what thou hast heard;
Chiefly what may concern her faith to know,
The great deliverance by her seed to come
(For by the Woman’s seed) on all mankind:
That ye may live, which will be many days,
Both in one faith unanimous, though sad,
With cause, for evils past; yet much more cheered
With meditation on the happy end.
He ended, and they both descend the hill;
Descended, Adam to the bower, where Eve
Lay sleeping, ran before; but found her waked;
And thus with words not sad she him received.
Whence thou returnest, and whither wentest, I know;
For God is also in sleep; and dreams advise,
Which he hath sent propitious, some great good
Presaging, since with sorrow and heart’s distress
Wearied I fell asleep: But now lead on;
In me is no delay; with thee to go,
Is to stay here; without thee here to stay,
Is to go hence unwilling; thou to me
Art all things under Heaven, all places thou,
Who for my wilful crime art banished hence.
This further consolation yet secure
I carry hence; though all by me is lost,
Such favour I unworthy am vouchsafed,
By me the Promised Seed shall all restore.
So spake our mother Eve; and Adam heard
Well pleased, but answered not: For now, too nigh
The Arch-Angel stood; and, from the other hill
To their fixed station, all in bright array
The Cherubim descended; on the ground
Gliding meteorous, as evening-mist
Risen from a river o’er the marish glides,
And gathers ground fast at the labourer’s heel
Homeward returning. High in front advanced,
The brandished sword of God before them blazed,
Fierce as a comet; which with torrid heat,
And vapour as the Libyan air adust,
Began to parch that temperate clime; whereat
In either hand the hastening Angel caught
Our lingering parents, and to the eastern gate
Led them direct, and down the cliff as fast
To the subjected plain; then disappeared.
They, looking back, all the eastern side beheld
Of Paradise, so late their happy seat,
Waved over by that flaming brand; the gate
With dreadful faces thronged, and fiery arms:
Some natural tears they dropt, but wiped them soon;
The world was all before them, where to choose
Their place of rest, and Providence their guide:
They, hand in hand, with wandering steps and slow,
Through Eden took their solitary way.


      Arms, and the man I sing, who, forc’d by fate,
      And haughty Juno’s unrelenting hate,
      Expell’d and exil’d, left the Trojan shore.
      Long labours, both by sea and land, he bore,
      And in the doubtful war, before he won
      The Latian realm, and built the destin’d town;
      His banish’d gods restor’d to rites divine,
      And settled sure succession in his line,
      From whence the race of Alban fathers come,
      And the long glories of majestic Rome.
      O Muse! the causes and the crimes relate;
      What goddess was provok’d, and whence her hate;
      For what offence the Queen of Heav’n began
      To persecute so brave, so just a man;
      Involv’d his anxious life in endless cares,
      Expos’d to wants, and hurried into wars!
      Can heav’nly minds such high resentment show,
      Or exercise their spite in human woe?

      Against the Tiber’s mouth, but far away,
      An ancient town was seated on the sea;
      A Tyrian colony; the people made
      Stout for the war, and studious of their trade:
      Carthage the name; belov’d by Juno more
      Than her own Argos, or the Samian shore.
      Here stood her chariot; here, if Heav’n were kind,
      The seat of awful empire she design’d.
      Yet she had heard an ancient rumour fly,
      (Long cited by the people of the sky,)
      That times to come should see the Trojan race
      Her Carthage ruin, and her tow’rs deface;
      Nor thus confin’d, the yoke of sov’reign sway
      Should on the necks of all the nations lay.
      She ponder’d this, and fear’d it was in fate;
      Nor could forget the war she wag’d of late
      For conqu’ring Greece against the Trojan state.
      Besides, long causes working in her mind,
      And secret seeds of envy, lay behind;
      Deep graven in her heart the doom remain’d
      Of partial Paris, and her form disdain’d;
      The grace bestow’d on ravish’d Ganymed,
      Electra’s glories, and her injur’d bed.
      Each was a cause alone; and all combin’d
      To kindle vengeance in her haughty mind.
      For this, far distant from the Latian coast
      She drove the remnants of the Trojan host;
      And sev’n long years th’ unhappy wand’ring train
      Were toss’d by storms, and scatter’d thro’ the main.
      Such time, such toil, requir’d the Roman name,
      Such length of labour for so vast a frame.

      Now scarce the Trojan fleet, with sails and oars,
      Had left behind the fair Sicilian shores,
      Ent’ring with cheerful shouts the wat’ry reign,
      And plowing frothy furrows in the main;
      When, lab’ring still with endless discontent,
      The Queen of Heav’n did thus her fury vent:

      “Then am I vanquish’d? must I yield?” said she,
      “And must the Trojans reign in Italy?
      So Fate will have it, and Jove adds his force;
      Nor can my pow’r divert their happy course.
      Could angry Pallas, with revengeful spleen,
      The Grecian navy burn, and drown the men?
      She, for the fault of one offending foe,
      The bolts of Jove himself presum’d to throw:
      With whirlwinds from beneath she toss’d the ship,
      And bare expos’d the bosom of the deep;
      Then, as an eagle gripes the trembling game,
      The wretch, yet hissing with her father’s flame,
      She strongly seiz’d, and with a burning wound
      Transfix’d, and naked, on a rock she bound.
      But I, who walk in awful state above,
      The majesty of heav’n, the sister wife of Jove,
      For length of years my fruitless force employ
      Against the thin remains of ruin’d Troy!
      What nations now to Juno’s pow’r will pray,
      Or off’rings on my slighted altars lay?”

      Thus rag’d the goddess; and, with fury fraught.
      The restless regions of the storms she sought,
      Where, in a spacious cave of living stone,
      The tyrant Aeolus, from his airy throne,
      With pow’r imperial curbs the struggling winds,
      And sounding tempests in dark prisons binds.
      This way and that th’ impatient captives tend,
      And, pressing for release, the mountains rend.
      High in his hall th’ undaunted monarch stands,
      And shakes his scepter, and their rage commands;
      Which did he not, their unresisted sway
      Would sweep the world before them in their way;
      Earth, air, and seas thro’ empty space would roll,
      And heav’n would fly before the driving soul.
      In fear of this, the Father of the Gods
      Confin’d their fury to those dark abodes,
      And lock’d ’em safe within, oppress’d with mountain loads;
      Impos’d a king, with arbitrary sway,
      To loose their fetters, or their force allay.
      To whom the suppliant queen her pray’rs address’d,
      And thus the tenor of her suit express’d:

      “O Aeolus! for to thee the King of Heav’n
      The pow’r of tempests and of winds has giv’n;
      Thy force alone their fury can restrain,
      And smooth the waves, or swell the troubled main.
      A race of wand’ring slaves, abhorr’d by me,
      With prosp’rous passage cut the Tuscan sea;
      To fruitful Italy their course they steer,
      And for their vanquish’d gods design new temples there.
      Raise all thy winds; with night involve the skies;
      Sink or disperse my fatal enemies.
      Twice sev’n, the charming daughters of the main,
      Around my person wait, and bear my train:
      Succeed my wish, and second my design;
      The fairest, Deiopeia, shall be thine,
      And make thee father of a happy line.”

      To this the god: “’Tis yours, O queen, to will
      The work which duty binds me to fulfil.
      These airy kingdoms, and this wide command,
      Are all the presents of your bounteous hand:
      Yours is my sov’reign’s grace; and, as your guest,
      I sit with gods at their celestial feast;
      Raise tempests at your pleasure, or subdue;
      Dispose of empire, which I hold from you.”

      He said, and hurl’d against the mountain side
      His quiv’ring spear, and all the god applied.
      The raging winds rush thro’ the hollow wound,
      And dance aloft in air, and skim along the ground;
      Then, settling on the sea, the surges sweep,
      Raise liquid mountains, and disclose the deep.
      South, East, and West with mix’d confusion roar,
      And roll the foaming billows to the shore.
      The cables crack; the sailors’ fearful cries
      Ascend; and sable night involves the skies;
      And heav’n itself is ravish’d from their eyes.
      Loud peals of thunder from the poles ensue;
      Then flashing fires the transient light renew;
      The face of things a frightful image bears,
      And present death in various forms appears.
      Struck with unusual fright, the Trojan chief,
      With lifted hands and eyes, invokes relief;
      And, “Thrice and four times happy those,” he cried,
      “That under Ilian walls before their parents died!
      Tydides, bravest of the Grecian train!
      Why could not I by that strong arm be slain,
      And lie by noble Hector on the plain,
      Or great Sarpedon, in those bloody fields
      Where Simois rolls the bodies and the shields
      Of heroes, whose dismember’d hands yet bear
      The dart aloft, and clench the pointed spear!”

      Thus while the pious prince his fate bewails,
      Fierce Boreas drove against his flying sails,
      And rent the sheets; the raging billows rise,
      And mount the tossing vessels to the skies:
      Nor can the shiv’ring oars sustain the blow;
      The galley gives her side, and turns her prow;
      While those astern, descending down the steep,
      Thro’ gaping waves behold the boiling deep.
      Three ships were hurried by the southern blast,
      And on the secret shelves with fury cast.
      Those hidden rocks th’ Ausonian sailors knew:
      They call’d them Altars, when they rose in view,
      And show’d their spacious backs above the flood.
      Three more fierce Eurus, in his angry mood,
      Dash’d on the shallows of the moving sand,
      And in mid ocean left them moor’d a-land.
      Orontes’ bark, that bore the Lycian crew,
      (A horrid sight!) ev’n in the hero’s view,
      From stem to stern by waves was overborne:
      The trembling pilot, from his rudder torn,
      Was headlong hurl’d; thrice round the ship was toss’d,
      Then bulg’d at once, and in the deep was lost;
      And here and there above the waves were seen
      Arms, pictures, precious goods, and floating men.
      The stoutest vessel to the storm gave way,
      And suck’d thro’ loosen’d planks the rushing sea.
      Ilioneus was her chief: Alethes old,
      Achates faithful, Abas young and bold,
      Endur’d not less; their ships, with gaping seams,
      Admit the deluge of the briny streams.

      Meantime imperial Neptune heard the sound
      Of raging billows breaking on the ground.
      Displeas’d, and fearing for his wat’ry reign,
      He rear’d his awful head above the main,
      Serene in majesty; then roll’d his eyes
      Around the space of earth, and seas, and skies.
      He saw the Trojan fleet dispers’d, distress’d,
      By stormy winds and wintry heav’n oppress’d.
      Full well the god his sister’s envy knew,
      And what her aims and what her arts pursue.
      He summon’d Eurus and the western blast,
      And first an angry glance on both he cast;
      Then thus rebuk’d: “Audacious winds! from whence
      This bold attempt, this rebel insolence?
      Is it for you to ravage seas and land,
      Unauthoriz’d by my supreme command?
      To raise such mountains on the troubled main?
      Whom I—but first ’tis fit the billows to restrain;
      And then you shall be taught obedience to my reign.
      Hence! to your lord my royal mandate bear,
      The realms of ocean and the fields of air
      Are mine, not his. By fatal lot to me
      The liquid empire fell, and trident of the sea.
      His pow’r to hollow caverns is confin’d:
      There let him reign, the jailer of the wind,
      With hoarse commands his breathing subjects call,
      And boast and bluster in his empty hall.”
      He spoke; and, while he spoke, he smooth’d the sea,
      Dispell’d the darkness, and restor’d the day.
      Cymothoe, Triton, and the sea-green train
      Of beauteous nymphs, the daughters of the main,
      Clear from the rocks the vessels with their hands:
      The god himself with ready trident stands,
      And opes the deep, and spreads the moving sands;
      Then heaves them off the shoals. Where’er he guides
      His finny coursers and in triumph rides,
      The waves unruffle and the sea subsides.
      As, when in tumults rise th’ ignoble crowd,
      Mad are their motions, and their tongues are loud;
      And stones and brands in rattling volleys fly,
      And all the rustic arms that fury can supply:
      If then some grave and pious man appear,
      They hush their noise, and lend a list’ning ear;
      He soothes with sober words their angry mood,
      And quenches their innate desire of blood:
      So, when the Father of the Flood appears,
      And o’er the seas his sov’reign trident rears,
      Their fury falls: he skims the liquid plains,
      High on his chariot, and, with loosen’d reins,
      Majestic moves along, and awful peace maintains.
      The weary Trojans ply their shatter’d oars
      To nearest land, and make the Libyan shores.

      Within a long recess there lies a bay:
      An island shades it from the rolling sea,
      And forms a port secure for ships to ride;
      Broke by the jutting land, on either side,
      In double streams the briny waters glide.
      Betwixt two rows of rocks a sylvan scene
      Appears above, and groves for ever green:
      A grot is form’d beneath, with mossy seats,
      To rest the Nereids, and exclude the heats.
      Down thro’ the crannies of the living walls
      The crystal streams descend in murm’ring falls:
      No haulsers need to bind the vessels here,
      Nor bearded anchors; for no storms they fear.
      Sev’n ships within this happy harbour meet,
      The thin remainders of the scatter’d fleet.
      The Trojans, worn with toils, and spent with woes,
      Leap on the welcome land, and seek their wish’d repose.

      First, good Achates, with repeated strokes
      Of clashing flints, their hidden fire provokes:
      Short flame succeeds; a bed of wither’d leaves
      The dying sparkles in their fall receives:
      Caught into life, in fiery fumes they rise,
      And, fed with stronger food, invade the skies.
      The Trojans, dropping wet, or stand around
      The cheerful blaze, or lie along the ground:
      Some dry their corn, infected with the brine,
      Then grind with marbles, and prepare to dine.
      Aeneas climbs the mountain’s airy brow,
      And takes a prospect of the seas below,
      If Capys thence, or Antheus he could spy,
      Or see the streamers of Caicus fly.
      No vessels were in view; but, on the plain,
      Three beamy stags command a lordly train
      Of branching heads: the more ignoble throng
      Attend their stately steps, and slowly graze along.
      He stood; and, while secure they fed below,
      He took the quiver and the trusty bow
      Achates us’d to bear: the leaders first
      He laid along, and then the vulgar pierc’d;
      Nor ceas’d his arrows, till the shady plain
      Sev’n mighty bodies with their blood distain.
      For the sev’n ships he made an equal share,
      And to the port return’d, triumphant from the war.
      The jars of gen’rous wine (Acestes’ gift,
      When his Trinacrian shores the navy left)
      He set abroach, and for the feast prepar’d,
      In equal portions with the ven’son shar’d.
      Thus while he dealt it round, the pious chief
      With cheerful words allay’d the common grief:
      “Endure, and conquer! Jove will soon dispose
      To future good our past and present woes.
      With me, the rocks of Scylla you have tried;
      Th’ inhuman Cyclops and his den defied.
      What greater ills hereafter can you bear?
      Resume your courage and dismiss your care,
      An hour will come, with pleasure to relate
      Your sorrows past, as benefits of Fate.
      Thro’ various hazards and events, we move
      To Latium and the realms foredoom’d by Jove.
      Call’d to the seat (the promise of the skies)
      Where Trojan kingdoms once again may rise,
      Endure the hardships of your present state;
      Live, and reserve yourselves for better fate.”

      These words he spoke, but spoke not from his heart;
      His outward smiles conceal’d his inward smart.
      The jolly crew, unmindful of the past,
      The quarry share, their plenteous dinner haste.
      Some strip the skin; some portion out the spoil;
      The limbs, yet trembling, in the caldrons boil;
      Some on the fire the reeking entrails broil.
      Stretch’d on the grassy turf, at ease they dine,
      Restore their strength with meat, and cheer their souls with
      wine.
      Their hunger thus appeas’d, their care attends
      The doubtful fortune of their absent friends:
      Alternate hopes and fears their minds possess,
      Whether to deem ’em dead, or in distress.
      Above the rest, Aeneas mourns the fate
      Of brave Orontes, and th’ uncertain state
      Of Gyas, Lycus, and of Amycus.
      The day, but not their sorrows, ended thus.

      When, from aloft, almighty Jove surveys
      Earth, air, and shores, and navigable seas,
      At length on Libyan realms he fix’d his eyes:
      Whom, pond’ring thus on human miseries,
      When Venus saw, she with a lowly look,
      Not free from tears, her heav’nly sire bespoke:

      “O King of Gods and Men! whose awful hand
      Disperses thunder on the seas and land,
      Disposing all with absolute command;
      How could my pious son thy pow’r incense?
      Or what, alas! is vanish’d Troy’s offence?
      Our hope of Italy not only lost,
      On various seas by various tempests toss’d,
      But shut from ev’ry shore, and barr’d from ev’ry coast.
      You promis’d once, a progeny divine
      Of Romans, rising from the Trojan line,
      In after times should hold the world in awe,
      And to the land and ocean give the law.
      How is your doom revers’d, which eas’d my care
      When Troy was ruin’d in that cruel war?
      Then fates to fates I could oppose; but now,
      When Fortune still pursues her former blow,
      What can I hope? What worse can still succeed?
      What end of labours has your will decreed?
      Antenor, from the midst of Grecian hosts,
      Could pass secure, and pierce th’ Illyrian coasts,
      Where, rolling down the steep, Timavus raves
      And thro’ nine channels disembogues his waves.
      At length he founded Padua’s happy seat,
      And gave his Trojans a secure retreat;
      There fix’d their arms, and there renew’d their name,
      And there in quiet rules, and crown’d with fame.
      But we, descended from your sacred line,
      Entitled to your heav’n and rites divine,
      Are banish’d earth; and, for the wrath of one,
      Remov’d from Latium and the promis’d throne.
      Are these our scepters? these our due rewards?
      And is it thus that Jove his plighted faith regards?”

      To whom the Father of th’ immortal race,
      Smiling with that serene indulgent face,
      With which he drives the clouds and clears the skies,
      First gave a holy kiss; then thus replies:

      “Daughter, dismiss thy fears; to thy desire
      The fates of thine are fix’d, and stand entire.
      Thou shalt behold thy wish’d Lavinian walls;
      And, ripe for heav’n, when fate Aeneas calls,
      Then shalt thou bear him up, sublime, to me:
      No councils have revers’d my firm decree.
      And, lest new fears disturb thy happy state,
      Know, I have search’d the mystic rolls of Fate:
      Thy son (nor is th’ appointed season far)
      In Italy shall wage successful war,
      Shall tame fierce nations in the bloody field,
      And sov’reign laws impose, and cities build,
      Till, after ev’ry foe subdued, the sun
      Thrice thro’ the signs his annual race shall run:
      This is his time prefix’d. Ascanius then,
      Now call’d Iulus, shall begin his reign.
      He thirty rolling years the crown shall wear,
      Then from Lavinium shall the seat transfer,
      And, with hard labour, Alba Longa build.
      The throne with his succession shall be fill’d
      Three hundred circuits more: then shall be seen
      Ilia the fair, a priestess and a queen,
      Who, full of Mars, in time, with kindly throes,
      Shall at a birth two goodly boys disclose.
      The royal babes a tawny wolf shall drain:
      Then Romulus his grandsire’s throne shall gain,
      Of martial tow’rs the founder shall become,
      The people Romans call, the city Rome.
      To them no bounds of empire I assign,
      Nor term of years to their immortal line.
      Ev’n haughty Juno, who, with endless broils,
      Earth, seas, and heav’n, and Jove himself turmoils;
      At length aton’d, her friendly pow’r shall join,
      To cherish and advance the Trojan line.
      The subject world shall Rome’s dominion own,
      And, prostrate, shall adore the nation of the gown.
      An age is ripening in revolving fate
      When Troy shall overturn the Grecian state,
      And sweet revenge her conqu’ring sons shall call,
      To crush the people that conspir’d her fall.
      Then Caesar from the Julian stock shall rise,
      Whose empire ocean, and whose fame the skies
      Alone shall bound; whom, fraught with eastern spoils,
      Our heav’n, the just reward of human toils,
      Securely shall repay with rites divine;
      And incense shall ascend before his sacred shrine.
      Then dire debate and impious war shall cease,
      And the stern age be soften’d into peace:
      Then banish’d Faith shall once again return,
      And Vestal fires in hallow’d temples burn;
      And Remus with Quirinus shall sustain
      The righteous laws, and fraud and force restrain.
      Janus himself before his fane shall wait,
      And keep the dreadful issues of his gate,
      With bolts and iron bars: within remains
      Imprison’d Fury, bound in brazen chains;
      High on a trophy rais’d, of useless arms,
      He sits, and threats the world with vain alarms.”

      He said, and sent Cyllenius with command
      To free the ports, and ope the Punic land
      To Trojan guests; lest, ignorant of fate,
      The queen might force them from her town and state.
      Down from the steep of heav’n Cyllenius flies,
      And cleaves with all his wings the yielding skies.
      Soon on the Libyan shore descends the god,
      Performs his message, and displays his rod:
      The surly murmurs of the people cease;
      And, as the fates requir’d, they give the peace:
      The queen herself suspends the rigid laws,
      The Trojans pities, and protects their cause.

      Meantime, in shades of night Aeneas lies:
      Care seiz’d his soul, and sleep forsook his eyes.
      But, when the sun restor’d the cheerful day,
      He rose, the coast and country to survey,
      Anxious and eager to discover more.
      It look’d a wild uncultivated shore;
      But, whether humankind, or beasts alone
      Possess’d the new-found region, was unknown.
      Beneath a ledge of rocks his fleet he hides:
      Tall trees surround the mountain’s shady sides;
      The bending brow above a safe retreat provides.
      Arm’d with two pointed darts, he leaves his friends,
      And true Achates on his steps attends.
      Lo! in the deep recesses of the wood,
      Before his eyes his goddess mother stood:
      A huntress in her habit and her mien;
      Her dress a maid, her air confess’d a queen.
      Bare were her knees, and knots her garments bind;
      Loose was her hair, and wanton’d in the wind;
      Her hand sustain’d a bow; her quiver hung behind.
      She seem’d a virgin of the Spartan blood:
      With such array Harpalyce bestrode
      Her Thracian courser and outstripp’d the rapid flood.
      “Ho, strangers! have you lately seen,” she said,
      “One of my sisters, like myself array’d,
      Who cross’d the lawn, or in the forest stray’d?
      A painted quiver at her back she bore;
      Varied with spots, a lynx’s hide she wore;
      And at full cry pursued the tusky boar.”

      Thus Venus: thus her son replied again:
      “None of your sisters have we heard or seen,
      O virgin! or what other name you bear
      Above that style; O more than mortal fair!
      Your voice and mien celestial birth betray!
      If, as you seem, the sister of the day,
      Or one at least of chaste Diana’s train,
      Let not an humble suppliant sue in vain;
      But tell a stranger, long in tempests toss’d,
      What earth we tread, and who commands the coast?
      Then on your name shall wretched mortals call,
      And offer’d victims at your altars fall.”
      “I dare not,” she replied, “assume the name
      Of goddess, or celestial honours claim:
      For Tyrian virgins bows and quivers bear,
      And purple buskins o’er their ankles wear.
      Know, gentle youth, in Libyan lands you are:
      A people rude in peace, and rough in war.
      The rising city, which from far you see,
      Is Carthage, and a Tyrian colony.
      Phoenician Dido rules the growing state,
      Who fled from Tyre, to shun her brother’s hate.
      Great were her wrongs, her story full of fate;
      Which I will sum in short. Sichaeus, known
      For wealth, and brother to the Punic throne,
      Possess’d fair Dido’s bed; and either heart
      At once was wounded with an equal dart.
      Her father gave her, yet a spotless maid;
      Pygmalion then the Tyrian scepter sway’d:
      One who condemn’d divine and human laws.
      Then strife ensued, and cursed gold the cause.
      The monarch, blinded with desire of wealth,
      With steel invades his brother’s life by stealth;
      Before the sacred altar made him bleed,
      And long from her conceal’d the cruel deed.
      Some tale, some new pretence, he daily coin’d,
      To soothe his sister, and delude her mind.
      At length, in dead of night, the ghost appears
      Of her unhappy lord: the spectre stares,
      And, with erected eyes, his bloody bosom bares.
      The cruel altars and his fate he tells,
      And the dire secret of his house reveals,
      Then warns the widow, with her household gods,
      To seek a refuge in remote abodes.
      Last, to support her in so long a way,
      He shows her where his hidden treasure lay.
      Admonish’d thus, and seiz’d with mortal fright,
      The queen provides companions of her flight:
      They meet, and all combine to leave the state,
      Who hate the tyrant, or who fear his hate.
      They seize a fleet, which ready rigg’d they find;
      Nor is Pygmalion’s treasure left behind.
      The vessels, heavy laden, put to sea
      With prosp’rous winds; a woman leads the way.
      I know not, if by stress of weather driv’n,
      Or was their fatal course dispos’d by Heav’n;
      At last they landed, where from far your eyes
      May view the turrets of new Carthage rise;
      There bought a space of ground, which Byrsa call’d,
      From the bull’s hide, they first inclos’d, and wall’d.
      But whence are you? what country claims your birth?
      What seek you, strangers, on our Libyan earth?”

      To whom, with sorrow streaming from his eyes,
      And deeply sighing, thus her son replies:
      “Could you with patience hear, or I relate,
      O nymph, the tedious annals of our fate!
      Thro’ such a train of woes if I should run,
      The day would sooner than the tale be done!
      From ancient Troy, by force expell’d, we came,
      If you by chance have heard the Trojan name.
      On various seas by various tempests toss’d,
      At length we landed on your Libyan coast.
      The good Aeneas am I call’d, a name,
      While Fortune favour’d, not unknown to fame.
      My household gods, companions of my woes,
      With pious care I rescued from our foes.
      To fruitful Italy my course was bent;
      And from the King of Heav’n is my descent.
      With twice ten sail I cross’d the Phrygian sea;
      Fate and my mother goddess led my way.
      Scarce sev’n, the thin remainders of my fleet,
      From storms preserv’d, within your harbour meet.
      Myself distress’d, an exile, and unknown,
      Debarr’d from Europe, and from Asia thrown,
      In Libyan deserts wander thus alone.”

      His tender parent could no longer bear;
      But, interposing, sought to soothe his care.
      “Whoe’er you are, not unbelov’d by Heav’n,
      Since on our friendly shore your ships are driv’n:
      Have courage: to the gods permit the rest,
      And to the queen expose your just request.
      Now take this earnest of success, for more:
      Your scatter’d fleet is join’d upon the shore;
      The winds are chang’d, your friends from danger free;
      Or I renounce my skill in augury.
      Twelve swans behold in beauteous order move,
      And stoop with closing pinions from above;
      Whom late the bird of Jove had driv’n along,
      And thro’ the clouds pursued the scatt’ring throng:
      Now, all united in a goodly team,
      They skim the ground, and seek the quiet stream.
      As they, with joy returning, clap their wings,
      And ride the circuit of the skies in rings;
      Not otherwise your ships, and ev’ry friend,
      Already hold the port, or with swift sails descend.
      No more advice is needful; but pursue
      The path before you, and the town in view.”

      Thus having said, she turn’d, and made appear
      Her neck refulgent, and dishevel’d hair,
      Which, flowing from her shoulders, reach’d the ground.
      And widely spread ambrosial scents around:
      In length of train descends her sweeping gown;
      And, by her graceful walk, the Queen of Love is known.
      The prince pursued the parting deity
      With words like these: “Ah! whither do you fly?
      Unkind and cruel! to deceive your son
      In borrow’d shapes, and his embrace to shun;
      Never to bless my sight, but thus unknown;
      And still to speak in accents not your own.”
      Against the goddess these complaints he made,
      But took the path, and her commands obey’d.
      They march, obscure; for Venus kindly shrouds
      With mists their persons, and involves in clouds,
      That, thus unseen, their passage none might stay,
      Or force to tell the causes of their way.
      This part perform’d, the goddess flies sublime
      To visit Paphos and her native clime;
      Where garlands, ever green and ever fair,
      With vows are offer’d, and with solemn pray’r:
      A hundred altars in her temple smoke;
      A thousand bleeding hearts her pow’r invoke.

      They climb the next ascent, and, looking down,
      Now at a nearer distance view the town.
      The prince with wonder sees the stately tow’rs,
      Which late were huts and shepherds’ homely bow’rs,
      The gates and streets; and hears, from ev’ry part,
      The noise and busy concourse of the mart.
      The toiling Tyrians on each other call
      To ply their labour: some extend the wall;
      Some build the citadel; the brawny throng
      Or dig, or push unwieldly stones along.
      Some for their dwellings choose a spot of ground,
      Which, first design’d, with ditches they surround.
      Some laws ordain; and some attend the choice
      Of holy senates, and elect by voice.
      Here some design a mole, while others there
      Lay deep foundations for a theatre;
      From marble quarries mighty columns hew,
      For ornaments of scenes, and future view.
      Such is their toil, and such their busy pains,
      As exercise the bees in flow’ry plains,
      When winter past, and summer scarce begun,
      Invites them forth to labour in the sun;
      Some lead their youth abroad, while some condense
      Their liquid store, and some in cells dispense;
      Some at the gate stand ready to receive
      The golden burthen, and their friends relieve;
      All with united force, combine to drive
      The lazy drones from the laborious hive:
      With envy stung, they view each other’s deeds;
      The fragrant work with diligence proceeds.
      “Thrice happy you, whose walls already rise!”
      Aeneas said, and view’d, with lifted eyes,
      Their lofty tow’rs; then, ent’ring at the gate,
      Conceal’d in clouds (prodigious to relate)
      He mix’d, unmark’d, among the busy throng,
      Borne by the tide, and pass’d unseen along.

      Full in the centre of the town there stood,
      Thick set with trees, a venerable wood.
      The Tyrians, landing near this holy ground,
      And digging here, a prosp’rous omen found:
      From under earth a courser’s head they drew,
      Their growth and future fortune to foreshew.
      This fated sign their foundress Juno gave,
      Of a soil fruitful, and a people brave.
      Sidonian Dido here with solemn state
      Did Juno’s temple build, and consecrate,
      Enrich’d with gifts, and with a golden shrine;
      But more the goddess made the place divine.
      On brazen steps the marble threshold rose,
      And brazen plates the cedar beams inclose:
      The rafters are with brazen cov’rings crown’d;
      The lofty doors on brazen hinges sound.
      What first Aeneas in this place beheld,
      Reviv’d his courage, and his fear expell’d.
      For while, expecting there the queen, he rais’d
      His wond’ring eyes, and round the temple gaz’d,
      Admir’d the fortune of the rising town,
      The striving artists, and their arts’ renown;
      He saw, in order painted on the wall,
      Whatever did unhappy Troy befall:
      The wars that fame around the world had blown,
      All to the life, and ev’ry leader known.
      There Agamemnon, Priam here, he spies,
      And fierce Achilles, who both kings defies.
      He stopp’d, and weeping said: “O friend! ev’n here
      The monuments of Trojan woes appear!
      Our known disasters fill ev’n foreign lands:
      See there, where old unhappy Priam stands!
      Ev’n the mute walls relate the warrior’s fame,
      And Trojan griefs the Tyrians’ pity claim.”
      He said, his tears a ready passage find,
      Devouring what he saw so well design’d,
      And with an empty picture fed his mind:
      For there he saw the fainting Grecians yield,
      And here the trembling Trojans quit the field,
      Pursued by fierce Achilles thro’ the plain,
      On his high chariot driving o’er the slain.
      The tents of Rhesus next, his grief renew,
      By their white sails betray’d to nightly view;
      And wakeful Diomede, whose cruel sword
      The sentries slew, nor spar’d their slumb’ring lord,
      Then took the fiery steeds, ere yet the food
      Of Troy they taste, or drink the Xanthian flood.
      Elsewhere he saw where Troilus defied
      Achilles, and unequal combat tried;
      Then, where the boy disarm’d, with loosen’d reins,
      Was by his horses hurried o’er the plains,
      Hung by the neck and hair, and dragg’d around:
      The hostile spear, yet sticking in his wound,
      With tracks of blood inscrib’d the dusty ground.
      Meantime the Trojan dames, oppress’d with woe,
      To Pallas’ fane in long procession go,
      In hopes to reconcile their heav’nly foe.
      They weep, they beat their breasts, they rend their hair,
      And rich embroider’d vests for presents bear;
      But the stern goddess stands unmov’d with pray’r.
      Thrice round the Trojan walls Achilles drew
      The corpse of Hector, whom in fight he slew.
      Here Priam sues; and there, for sums of gold,
      The lifeless body of his son is sold.
      So sad an object, and so well express’d,
      Drew sighs and groans from the griev’d hero’s breast,
      To see the figure of his lifeless friend,
      And his old sire his helpless hand extend.
      Himself he saw amidst the Grecian train,
      Mix’d in the bloody battle on the plain;
      And swarthy Memnon in his arms he knew,
      His pompous ensigns, and his Indian crew.
      Penthisilea there, with haughty grace,
      Leads to the wars an Amazonian race:
      In their right hands a pointed dart they wield;
      The left, for ward, sustains the lunar shield.
      Athwart her breast a golden belt she throws,
      Amidst the press alone provokes a thousand foes,
      And dares her maiden arms to manly force oppose.

      Thus while the Trojan prince employs his eyes,
      Fix’d on the walls with wonder and surprise,
      The beauteous Dido, with a num’rous train
      And pomp of guards, ascends the sacred fane.
      Such on Eurotas’ banks, or Cynthus’ height,
      Diana seems; and so she charms the sight,
      When in the dance the graceful goddess leads
      The choir of nymphs, and overtops their heads:
      Known by her quiver, and her lofty mien,
      She walks majestic, and she looks their queen;
      Latona sees her shine above the rest,
      And feeds with secret joy her silent breast.
      Such Dido was; with such becoming state,
      Amidst the crowd, she walks serenely great.
      Their labour to her future sway she speeds,
      And passing with a gracious glance proceeds;
      Then mounts the throne, high plac’d before the shrine:
      In crowds around, the swarming people join.
      She takes petitions, and dispenses laws,
      Hears and determines ev’ry private cause;
      Their tasks in equal portions she divides,
      And, where unequal, there by lots decides.
      Another way by chance Aeneas bends
      His eyes, and unexpected sees his friends,
      Antheus, Sergestus grave, Cloanthus strong,
      And at their backs a mighty Trojan throng,
      Whom late the tempest on the billows toss’d,
      And widely scatter’d on another coast.
      The prince, unseen, surpris’d with wonder stands,
      And longs, with joyful haste, to join their hands;
      But, doubtful of the wish’d event, he stays,
      And from the hollow cloud his friends surveys,
      Impatient till they told their present state,
      And where they left their ships, and what their fate,
      And why they came, and what was their request;
      For these were sent, commission’d by the rest,
      To sue for leave to land their sickly men,
      And gain admission to the gracious queen.
      Ent’ring, with cries they fill’d the holy fane;
      Then thus, with lowly voice, Ilioneus began:

      “O Queen! indulg’d by favour of the gods
      To found an empire in these new abodes,
      To build a town, with statutes to restrain
      The wild inhabitants beneath thy reign,
      We wretched Trojans, toss’d on ev’ry shore,
      From sea to sea, thy clemency implore.
      Forbid the fires our shipping to deface!
      Receive th’ unhappy fugitives to grace,
      And spare the remnant of a pious race!
      We come not with design of wasteful prey,
      To drive the country, force the swains away:
      Nor such our strength, nor such is our desire;
      The vanquish’d dare not to such thoughts aspire.
      A land there is, Hesperia nam’d of old;
      The soil is fruitful, and the men are bold
      Th’ Oenotrians held it once, by common fame
      Now call’d Italia, from the leader’s name.
      To that sweet region was our voyage bent,
      When winds and ev’ry warring element
      Disturb’d our course, and, far from sight of land,
      Cast our torn vessels on the moving sand:
      The sea came on; the South, with mighty roar,
      Dispers’d and dash’d the rest upon the rocky shore.
      Those few you see escap’d the storm, and fear,
      Unless you interpose, a shipwreck here.
      What men, what monsters, what inhuman race,
      What laws, what barb’rous customs of the place,
      Shut up a desert shore to drowning men,
      And drive us to the cruel seas again?
      If our hard fortune no compassion draws,
      Nor hospitable rights, nor human laws,
      The gods are just, and will revenge our cause.
      Aeneas was our prince: a juster lord,
      Or nobler warrior, never drew a sword;
      Observant of the right, religious of his word.
      If yet he lives, and draws this vital air,
      Nor we, his friends, of safety shall despair;
      Nor you, great queen, these offices repent,
      Which he will equal, and perhaps augment.
      We want not cities, nor Sicilian coasts,
      Where King Acestes Trojan lineage boasts.
      Permit our ships a shelter on your shores,
      Refitted from your woods with planks and oars,
      That, if our prince be safe, we may renew
      Our destin’d course, and Italy pursue.
      But if, O best of men, the Fates ordain
      That thou art swallow’d in the Libyan main,
      And if our young Iulus be no more,
      Dismiss our navy from your friendly shore,
      That we to good Acestes may return,
      And with our friends our common losses mourn.”
      Thus spoke Ilioneus: the Trojan crew
      With cries and clamours his request renew.

      The modest queen a while, with downcast eyes,
      Ponder’d the speech; then briefly thus replies:
      “Trojans, dismiss your fears; my cruel fate,
      And doubts attending an unsettled state,
      Force me to guard my coast from foreign foes.
      Who has not heard the story of your woes,
      The name and fortune of your native place,
      The fame and valour of the Phrygian race?
      We Tyrians are not so devoid of sense,
      Nor so remote from Phoebus’ influence.
      Whether to Latian shores your course is bent,
      Or, driv’n by tempests from your first intent,
      You seek the good Acestes’ government,
      Your men shall be receiv’d, your fleet repair’d,
      And sail, with ships of convoy for your guard:
      Or, would you stay, and join your friendly pow’rs
      To raise and to defend the Tyrian tow’rs,
      My wealth, my city, and myself are yours.
      And would to Heav’n, the Storm, you felt, would bring
      On Carthaginian coasts your wand’ring king.
      My people shall, by my command, explore
      The ports and creeks of ev’ry winding shore,
      And towns, and wilds, and shady woods, in quest
      Of so renown’d and so desir’d a guest.”

      Rais’d in his mind the Trojan hero stood,
      And long’d to break from out his ambient cloud:
      Achates found it, and thus urg’d his way:
      “From whence, O goddess-born, this long delay?
      What more can you desire, your welcome sure,
      Your fleet in safety, and your friends secure?
      One only wants; and him we saw in vain
      Oppose the Storm, and swallow’d in the main.
      Orontes in his fate our forfeit paid;
      The rest agrees with what your mother said.”
      Scarce had he spoken, when the cloud gave way,
      The mists flew upward and dissolv’d in day.

      The Trojan chief appear’d in open sight,
      August in visage, and serenely bright.
      His mother goddess, with her hands divine,
      Had form’d his curling locks, and made his temples shine,
      And giv’n his rolling eyes a sparkling grace,
      And breath’d a youthful vigour on his face;
      Like polish’d ivory, beauteous to behold,
      Or Parian marble, when enchas’d in gold:
      Thus radiant from the circling cloud he broke,
      And thus with manly modesty he spoke:

      “He whom you seek am I; by tempests toss’d,
      And sav’d from shipwreck on your Libyan coast;
      Presenting, gracious queen, before your throne,
      A prince that owes his life to you alone.
      Fair majesty, the refuge and redress
      Of those whom fate pursues, and wants oppress,
      You, who your pious offices employ
      To save the relics of abandon’d Troy;
      Receive the shipwreck’d on your friendly shore,
      With hospitable rites relieve the poor;
      Associate in your town a wand’ring train,
      And strangers in your palace entertain:
      What thanks can wretched fugitives return,
      Who, scatter’d thro’ the world, in exile mourn?
      The gods, if gods to goodness are inclin’d;
      If acts of mercy touch their heav’nly mind,
      And, more than all the gods, your gen’rous heart.
      Conscious of worth, requite its own desert!
      In you this age is happy, and this earth,
      And parents more than mortal gave you birth.
      While rolling rivers into seas shall run,
      And round the space of heav’n the radiant sun;
      While trees the mountain tops with shades supply,
      Your honour, name, and praise shall never die.
      Whate’er abode my fortune has assign’d,
      Your image shall be present in my mind.”
      Thus having said, he turn’d with pious haste,
      And joyful his expecting friends embrac’d:
      With his right hand Ilioneus was grac’d,
      Serestus with his left; then to his breast
      Cloanthus and the noble Gyas press’d;
      And so by turns descended to the rest.

      The Tyrian queen stood fix’d upon his face,
      Pleas’d with his motions, ravish’d with his grace;
      Admir’d his fortunes, more admir’d the man;
      Then recollected stood, and thus began:
      “What fate, O goddess-born; what angry pow’rs
      Have cast you shipwreck’d on our barren shores?
      Are you the great Aeneas, known to fame,
      Who from celestial seed your lineage claim?

      The same Aeneas whom fair Venus bore
      To fam’d Anchises on th’ Idaean shore?
      It calls into my mind, tho’ then a child,
      When Teucer came, from Salamis exil’d,
      And sought my father’s aid, to be restor’d:
      My father Belus then with fire and sword
      Invaded Cyprus, made the region bare,
      And, conqu’ring, finish’d the successful war.
      From him the Trojan siege I understood,
      The Grecian chiefs, and your illustrious blood.
      Your foe himself the Dardan valour prais’d,
      And his own ancestry from Trojans rais’d.
      Enter, my noble guest, and you shall find,
      If not a costly welcome, yet a kind:
      For I myself, like you, have been distress’d,
      Till Heav’n afforded me this place of rest;
      Like you, an alien in a land unknown,
      I learn to pity woes so like my own.”
      She said, and to the palace led her guest;
      Then offer’d incense, and proclaim’d a feast.
      Nor yet less careful for her absent friends,
      Twice ten fat oxen to the ships she sends;
      Besides a hundred boars, a hundred lambs,
      With bleating cries, attend their milky dams;
      And jars of gen’rous wine and spacious bowls
      She gives, to cheer the sailors’ drooping souls.
      Now purple hangings clothe the palace walls,
      And sumptuous feasts are made in splendid halls:
      On Tyrian carpets, richly wrought, they dine;
      With loads of massy plate the sideboards shine,
      And antique vases, all of gold emboss’d
      (The gold itself inferior to the cost),
      Of curious work, where on the sides were seen
      The fights and figures of illustrious men,
      From their first founder to the present queen.

      The good Aeneas, whose paternal care
      Iulus’ absence could no longer bear,
      Dispatch’d Achates to the ships in haste,
      To give a glad relation of the past,
      And, fraught with precious gifts, to bring the boy,
      Snatch’d from the ruins of unhappy Troy:
      A robe of tissue, stiff with golden wire;
      An upper vest, once Helen’s rich attire,
      From Argos by the fam’d adultress brought,
      With golden flow’rs and winding foliage wrought,
      Her mother Leda’s present, when she came
      To ruin Troy and set the world on flame;
      The scepter Priam’s eldest daughter bore,
      Her orient necklace, and the crown she wore
      Of double texture, glorious to behold,
      One order set with gems, and one with gold.
      Instructed thus, the wise Achates goes,
      And in his diligence his duty shows.

      But Venus, anxious for her son’s affairs,
      New counsels tries, and new designs prepares:
      That Cupid should assume the shape and face
      Of sweet Ascanius, and the sprightly grace;
      Should bring the presents, in her nephew’s stead,
      And in Eliza’s veins the gentle poison shed:
      For much she fear’d the Tyrians, double-tongued,
      And knew the town to Juno’s care belong’d.
      These thoughts by night her golden slumbers broke,
      And thus alarm’d, to winged Love she spoke:
      “My son, my strength, whose mighty pow’r alone
      Controls the Thund’rer on his awful throne,
      To thee thy much-afflicted mother flies,
      And on thy succour and thy faith relies.
      Thou know’st, my son, how Jove’s revengeful wife,
      By force and fraud, attempts thy brother’s life;
      And often hast thou mourn’d with me his pains.
      Him Dido now with blandishment detains;
      But I suspect the town where Juno reigns.
      For this ’tis needful to prevent her art,
      And fire with love the proud Phoenician’s heart:
      A love so violent, so strong, so sure,
      As neither age can change, nor art can cure.
      How this may be perform’d, now take my mind:
      Ascanius by his father is design’d
      To come, with presents laden, from the port,
      To gratify the queen, and gain the court.
      I mean to plunge the boy in pleasing sleep,
      And, ravish’d, in Idalian bow’rs to keep,
      Or high Cythera, that the sweet deceit
      May pass unseen, and none prevent the cheat.
      Take thou his form and shape. I beg the grace
      But only for a night’s revolving space:
      Thyself a boy, assume a boy’s dissembled face;
      That when, amidst the fervour of the feast,
      The Tyrian hugs and fonds thee on her breast,
      And with sweet kisses in her arms constrains,
      Thou may’st infuse thy venom in her veins.”
      The God of Love obeys, and sets aside
      His bow and quiver, and his plumy pride;
      He walks Iulus in his mother’s sight,
      And in the sweet resemblance takes delight.

      The goddess then to young Ascanius flies,
      And in a pleasing slumber seals his eyes:
      Lull’d in her lap, amidst a train of Loves,
      She gently bears him to her blissful groves,
      Then with a wreath of myrtle crowns his head,
      And softly lays him on a flow’ry bed.
      Cupid meantime assum’d his form and face,
      Foll’wing Achates with a shorter pace,
      And brought the gifts. The queen already sate
      Amidst the Trojan lords, in shining state,
      High on a golden bed: her princely guest
      Was next her side; in order sate the rest.
      Then canisters with bread are heap’d on high;
      Th’ attendants water for their hands supply,
      And, having wash’d, with silken towels dry.
      Next fifty handmaids in long order bore
      The censers, and with fumes the gods adore:
      Then youths, and virgins twice as many, join
      To place the dishes, and to serve the wine.
      The Tyrian train, admitted to the feast,
      Approach, and on the painted couches rest.
      All on the Trojan gifts with wonder gaze,
      But view the beauteous boy with more amaze,
      His rosy-colour’d cheeks, his radiant eyes,
      His motions, voice, and shape, and all the god’s disguise;
      Nor pass unprais’d the vest and veil divine,
      Which wand’ring foliage and rich flow’rs entwine.
      But, far above the rest, the royal dame,
      (Already doom’d to love’s disastrous flame,)
      With eyes insatiate, and tumultuous joy,
      Beholds the presents, and admires the boy.
      The guileful god about the hero long,
      With children’s play, and false embraces, hung;
      Then sought the queen: she took him to her arms
      With greedy pleasure, and devour’d his charms.
      Unhappy Dido little thought what guest,
      How dire a god, she drew so near her breast;
      But he, not mindless of his mother’s pray’r,
      Works in the pliant bosom of the fair,
      And moulds her heart anew, and blots her former care.
      The dead is to the living love resign’d;
      And all Aeneas enters in her mind.

      Now, when the rage of hunger was appeas’d,
      The meat remov’d, and ev’ry guest was pleas’d,
      The golden bowls with sparkling wine are crown’d,
      And thro’ the palace cheerful cries resound.
      From gilded roofs depending lamps display
      Nocturnal beams, that emulate the day.
      A golden bowl, that shone with gems divine,
      The queen commanded to be crown’d with wine:
      The bowl that Belus us’d, and all the Tyrian line.
      Then, silence thro’ the hall proclaim’d, she spoke:
      “O hospitable Jove! we thus invoke,
      With solemn rites, thy sacred name and pow’r;
      Bless to both nations this auspicious hour!
      So may the Trojan and the Tyrian line
      In lasting concord from this day combine.
      Thou, Bacchus, god of joys and friendly cheer,
      And gracious Juno, both be present here!
      And you, my lords of Tyre, your vows address
      To Heav’n with mine, to ratify the peace.”
      The goblet then she took, with nectar crown’d
      (Sprinkling the first libations on the ground,)
      And rais’d it to her mouth with sober grace;
      Then, sipping, offer’d to the next in place.
      ’Twas Bitias whom she call’d, a thirsty soul;
      He took the challenge, and embrac’d the bowl,
      With pleasure swill’d the gold, nor ceas’d to draw,
      Till he the bottom of the brimmer saw.
      The goblet goes around: Iopas brought
      His golden lyre, and sung what ancient Atlas taught:
      The various labours of the wand’ring moon,
      And whence proceed th’ eclipses of the sun;
      Th’ original of men and beasts; and whence
      The rains arise, and fires their warmth dispense,
      And fix’d and erring stars dispose their influence;
      What shakes the solid earth; what cause delays
      The summer nights and shortens winter days.
      With peals of shouts the Tyrians praise the song:
      Those peals are echo’d by the Trojan throng.
      Th’ unhappy queen with talk prolong’d the night,
      And drank large draughts of love with vast delight;
      Of Priam much enquir’d, of Hector more;
      Then ask’d what arms the swarthy Memnon wore,
      What troops he landed on the Trojan shore;
      The steeds of Diomede varied the discourse,
      And fierce Achilles, with his matchless force;
      At length, as fate and her ill stars requir’d,
      To hear the series of the war desir’d.
      “Relate at large, my godlike guest,” she said,
      “The Grecian stratagems, the town betray’d:
      The fatal issue of so long a war,
      Your flight, your wand’rings, and your woes, declare;
      For, since on ev’ry sea, on ev’ry coast,
      Your men have been distress’d, your navy toss’d,
      Sev’n times the sun has either tropic view’d,
      The winter banish’d, and the spring renew’d.”



 

      All were attentive to the godlike man,
      When from his lofty couch he thus began:
      “Great queen, what you command me to relate
      Renews the sad remembrance of our fate:
      An empire from its old foundations rent,
      And ev’ry woe the Trojans underwent;
      A peopled city made a desert place;
      All that I saw, and part of which I was:
      Not ev’n the hardest of our foes could hear,
      Nor stern Ulysses tell without a tear.
      And now the latter watch of wasting night,
      And setting stars, to kindly rest invite;
      But, since you take such int’rest in our woe,
      And Troy’s disastrous end desire to know,
      I will restrain my tears, and briefly tell
      What in our last and fatal night befell.

      “By destiny compell’d, and in despair,
      The Greeks grew weary of the tedious war,
      And by Minerva’s aid a fabric rear’d,
      Which like a steed of monstrous height appear’d:
      The sides were plank’d with pine; they feign’d it made
      For their return, and this the vow they paid.
      Thus they pretend, but in the hollow side
      Selected numbers of their soldiers hide:
      With inward arms the dire machine they load,
      And iron bowels stuff the dark abode.
      In sight of Troy lies Tenedos, an isle
      (While Fortune did on Priam’s empire smile)
      Renown’d for wealth; but, since, a faithless bay,
      Where ships expos’d to wind and weather lay.
      There was their fleet conceal’d. We thought, for Greece
      Their sails were hoisted, and our fears release.
      The Trojans, coop’d within their walls so long,
      Unbar their gates, and issue in a throng,
      Like swarming bees, and with delight survey
      The camp deserted, where the Grecians lay:
      The quarters of the sev’ral chiefs they show’d;
      Here Phoenix, here Achilles, made abode;
      Here join’d the battles; there the navy rode.
      Part on the pile their wond’ring eyes employ:
      The pile by Pallas rais’d to ruin Troy.
      Thymoetes first (’tis doubtful whether hir’d,
      Or so the Trojan destiny requir’d)
      Mov’d that the ramparts might be broken down,
      To lodge the monster fabric in the town.
      But Capys, and the rest of sounder mind,
      The fatal present to the flames designed,
      Or to the wat’ry deep; at least to bore
      The hollow sides, and hidden frauds explore.
      The giddy vulgar, as their fancies guide,
      With noise say nothing, and in parts divide.
      Laocoon, follow’d by a num’rous crowd,
      Ran from the fort, and cried, from far, aloud:
      ‘O wretched countrymen! what fury reigns?
      What more than madness has possess’d your brains?
      Think you the Grecians from your coasts are gone?
      And are Ulysses’ arts no better known?
      This hollow fabric either must inclose,
      Within its blind recess, our secret foes;
      Or ’tis an engine rais’d above the town,
      T’ o’erlook the walls, and then to batter down.
      Somewhat is sure design’d, by fraud or force:
      Trust not their presents, nor admit the horse.’
      Thus having said, against the steed he threw
      His forceful spear, which, hissing as it flew,
      Pierc’d thro’ the yielding planks of jointed wood,
      And trembling in the hollow belly stood.
      The sides, transpierc’d, return a rattling sound,
      And groans of Greeks inclos’d come issuing thro’ the wound
      And, had not Heav’n the fall of Troy design’d,
      Or had not men been fated to be blind,
      Enough was said and done t’inspire a better mind.
      Then had our lances pierc’d the treach’rous wood,
      And Ilian tow’rs and Priam’s empire stood.
      Meantime, with shouts, the Trojan shepherds bring
      A captive Greek, in bands, before the king;
      Taken to take; who made himself their prey,
      T’ impose on their belief, and Troy betray;
      Fix’d on his aim, and obstinately bent
      To die undaunted, or to circumvent.
      About the captive, tides of Trojans flow;
      All press to see, and some insult the foe.
      Now hear how well the Greeks their wiles disguis’d;
      Behold a nation in a man compris’d.
      Trembling the miscreant stood, unarm’d and bound;
      He star’d, and roll’d his haggard eyes around,
      Then said: ‘Alas! what earth remains, what sea
      Is open to receive unhappy me?
      What fate a wretched fugitive attends,
      Scorn’d by my foes, abandon’d by my friends?’
      He said, and sigh’d, and cast a rueful eye:
      Our pity kindles, and our passions die.
      We cheer the youth to make his own defence,
      And freely tell us what he was, and whence:
      What news he could impart, we long to know,
      And what to credit from a captive foe.

      “His fear at length dismiss’d, he said: ‘Whate’er
      My fate ordains, my words shall be sincere:
      I neither can nor dare my birth disclaim;
      Greece is my country, Sinon is my name.
      Tho’ plung’d by Fortune’s pow’r in misery,
      ’Tis not in Fortune’s pow’r to make me lie.
      If any chance has hither brought the name
      Of Palamedes, not unknown to fame,
      Who suffer’d from the malice of the times,
      Accus’d and sentenc’d for pretended crimes,
      Because these fatal wars he would prevent;
      Whose death the wretched Greeks too late lament;
      Me, then a boy, my father, poor and bare
      Of other means, committed to his care,
      His kinsman and companion in the war.
      While Fortune favour’d, while his arms support
      The cause, and rul’d the counsels, of the court,
      I made some figure there; nor was my name
      Obscure, nor I without my share of fame.
      But when Ulysses, with fallacious arts,
      Had made impression in the people’s hearts,
      And forg’d a treason in my patron’s name
      (I speak of things too far divulg’d by fame),
      My kinsman fell. Then I, without support,
      In private mourn’d his loss, and left the court.
      Mad as I was, I could not bear his fate
      With silent grief, but loudly blam’d the state,
      And curs’d the direful author of my woes.
      ’Twas told again; and hence my ruin rose.
      I threaten’d, if indulgent Heav’n once more
      Would land me safely on my native shore,
      His death with double vengeance to restore.
      This mov’d the murderer’s hate; and soon ensued
      Th’ effects of malice from a man so proud.
      Ambiguous rumours thro’ the camp he spread,
      And sought, by treason, my devoted head;
      New crimes invented; left unturn’d no stone,
      To make my guilt appear, and hide his own;
      Till Calchas was by force and threat’ning wrought:
      But why—why dwell I on that anxious thought?
      If on my nation just revenge you seek,
      And ’tis t’ appear a foe, t’ appear a Greek;
      Already you my name and country know;
      Assuage your thirst of blood, and strike the blow:
      My death will both the kingly brothers please,
      And set insatiate Ithacus at ease.’
      This fair unfinish’d tale, these broken starts,
      Rais’d expectations in our longing hearts:
      Unknowing as we were in Grecian arts.
      His former trembling once again renew’d,
      With acted fear, the villain thus pursued:

      “‘Long had the Grecians (tir’d with fruitless care,
      And wearied with an unsuccessful war)
      Resolv’d to raise the siege, and leave the town;
      And, had the gods permitted, they had gone;
      But oft the wintry seas and southern winds
      Withstood their passage home, and chang’d their minds.
      Portents and prodigies their souls amaz’d;
      But most, when this stupendous pile was rais’d:
      Then flaming meteors, hung in air, were seen,
      And thunders rattled thro’ a sky serene.
      Dismay’d, and fearful of some dire event,
      Eurypylus t’ enquire their fate was sent.
      He from the gods this dreadful answer brought:

      “O Grecians, when the Trojan shores you sought,
      Your passage with a virgin’s blood was bought:
      So must your safe return be bought again,
      And Grecian blood once more atone the main.”
      The spreading rumour round the people ran;
      All fear’d, and each believ’d himself the man.
      Ulysses took th’ advantage of their fright;
      Call’d Calchas, and produc’d in open sight:
      Then bade him name the wretch, ordain’d by fate
      The public victim, to redeem the state.
      Already some presag’d the dire event,
      And saw what sacrifice Ulysses meant.
      For twice five days the good old seer withstood
      Th’ intended treason, and was dumb to blood,
      Till, tir’d, with endless clamours and pursuit
      Of Ithacus, he stood no longer mute;
      But, as it was agreed, pronounc’d that I
      Was destin’d by the wrathful gods to die.
      All prais’d the sentence, pleas’d the storm should fall
      On one alone, whose fury threaten’d all.
      The dismal day was come; the priests prepare
      Their leaven’d cakes, and fillets for my hair.
      I follow’d nature’s laws, and must avow
      I broke my bonds and fled the fatal blow.
      Hid in a weedy lake all night I lay,
      Secure of safety when they sail’d away.
      But now what further hopes for me remain,
      To see my friends, or native soil, again;
      My tender infants, or my careful sire,
      Whom they returning will to death require;
      Will perpetrate on them their first design,
      And take the forfeit of their heads for mine?
      Which, O! if pity mortal minds can move,
      If there be faith below, or gods above,
      If innocence and truth can claim desert,
      Ye Trojans, from an injur’d wretch avert.’

      “False tears true pity move; the king commands
      To loose his fetters, and unbind his hands:
      Then adds these friendly words: ‘Dismiss thy fears;
      Forget the Greeks; be mine as thou wert theirs.
      But truly tell, was it for force or guile,
      Or some religious end, you rais’d the pile?’
      Thus said the king. He, full of fraudful arts,
      This well-invented tale for truth imparts:
      ‘Ye lamps of heav’n!’ he said, and lifted high
      His hands now free, ‘thou venerable sky!
      Inviolable pow’rs, ador’d with dread!
      Ye fatal fillets, that once bound this head!
      Ye sacred altars, from whose flames I fled!
      Be all of you adjur’d; and grant I may,
      Without a crime, th’ ungrateful Greeks betray,
      Reveal the secrets of the guilty state,
      And justly punish whom I justly hate!
      But you, O king, preserve the faith you gave,
      If I, to save myself, your empire save.
      The Grecian hopes, and all th’ attempts they made,
      Were only founded on Minerva’s aid.
      But from the time when impious Diomede,
      And false Ulysses, that inventive head,
      Her fatal image from the temple drew,
      The sleeping guardians of the castle slew,
      Her virgin statue with their bloody hands
      Polluted, and profan’d her holy bands;
      From thence the tide of fortune left their shore,
      And ebb’d much faster than it flow’d before:
      Their courage languish’d, as their hopes decay’d;
      And Pallas, now averse, refus’d her aid.
      Nor did the goddess doubtfully declare
      Her alter’d mind and alienated care.
      When first her fatal image touch’d the ground,
      She sternly cast her glaring eyes around,
      That sparkled as they roll’d, and seem’d to threat:
      Her heav’nly limbs distill’d a briny sweat.
      Thrice from the ground she leap’d, was seen to wield
      Her brandish’d lance, and shake her horrid shield.
      Then Calchas bade our host for flight
      And hope no conquest from the tedious war,
      Till first they sail’d for Greece; with pray’rs besought
      Her injur’d pow’r, and better omens brought.
      And now their navy plows the wat’ry main,
      Yet soon expect it on your shores again,
      With Pallas pleas’d; as Calchas did ordain.
      But first, to reconcile the blue-ey’d maid
      For her stol’n statue and her tow’r betray’d,
      Warn’d by the seer, to her offended name
      We rais’d and dedicate this wondrous frame,
      So lofty, lest thro’ your forbidden gates
      It pass, and intercept our better fates:
      For, once admitted there, our hopes are lost;
      And Troy may then a new Palladium boast;
      For so religion and the gods ordain,
      That, if you violate with hands profane
      Minerva’s gift, your town in flames shall burn,
      (Which omen, O ye gods, on Grecia turn!)
      But if it climb, with your assisting hands,
      The Trojan walls, and in the city stands;
      Then Troy shall Argos and Mycenae burn,
      And the reverse of fate on us return.’

      “With such deceits he gain’d their easy hearts,
      Too prone to credit his perfidious arts.
      What Diomede, nor Thetis’ greater son,
      A thousand ships, nor ten years’ siege, had done:
      False tears and fawning words the city won.

      “A greater omen, and of worse portent,
      Did our unwary minds with fear torment,
      Concurring to produce the dire event.
      Laocoon, Neptune’s priest by lot that year,
      With solemn pomp then sacrific’d a steer;
      When, dreadful to behold, from sea we spied
      Two serpents, rank’d abreast, the seas divide,
      And smoothly sweep along the swelling tide.
      Their flaming crests above the waves they show;
      Their bellies seem to burn the seas below;
      Their speckled tails advance to steer their course,
      And on the sounding shore the flying billows force.
      And now the strand, and now the plain they held;
      Their ardent eyes with bloody streaks were fill’d;
      Their nimble tongues they brandish’d as they came,
      And lick’d their hissing jaws, that sputter’d flame.
      We fled amaz’d; their destin’d way they take,
      And to Laocoon and his children make;
      And first around the tender boys they wind,
      Then with their sharpen’d fangs their limbs and bodies grind.
      The wretched father, running to their aid
      With pious haste, but vain, they next invade;
      Twice round his waist their winding volumes roll’d;
      And twice about his gasping throat they fold.
      The priest thus doubly chok’d, their crests divide,
      And tow’ring o’er his head in triumph ride.
      With both his hands he labours at the knots;
      His holy fillets the blue venom blots;
      His roaring fills the flitting air around.
      Thus, when an ox receives a glancing wound,
      He breaks his bands, the fatal altar flies,
      And with loud bellowings breaks the yielding skies.
      Their tasks perform’d, the serpents quit their prey,
      And to the tow’r of Pallas make their way:
      Couch’d at her feet, they lie protected there
      By her large buckler and protended spear.
      Amazement seizes all; the gen’ral cry
      Proclaims Laocoon justly doom’d to die,
      Whose hand the will of Pallas had withstood,
      And dared to violate the sacred wood.
      All vote t’ admit the steed, that vows be paid
      And incense offer’d to th’ offended maid.
      A spacious breach is made; the town lies bare;
      Some hoisting levers, some the wheels prepare
      And fasten to the horse’s feet; the rest
      With cables haul along th’ unwieldly beast.
      Each on his fellow for assistance calls;
      At length the fatal fabric mounts the walls,
      Big with destruction. Boys with chaplets crown’d,
      And choirs of virgins, sing and dance around.
      Thus rais’d aloft, and then descending down,
      It enters o’er our heads, and threats the town.
      O sacred city, built by hands divine!
      O valiant heroes of the Trojan line!
      Four times he struck: as oft the clashing sound
      Of arms was heard, and inward groans rebound.
      Yet, mad with zeal, and blinded with our fate,
      We haul along the horse in solemn state;
      Then place the dire portent within the tow’r.
      Cassandra cried, and curs’d th’ unhappy hour;
      Foretold our fate; but, by the god’s decree,
      All heard, and none believ’d the prophecy.
      With branches we the fanes adorn, and waste,
      In jollity, the day ordain’d to be the last.
      Meantime the rapid heav’ns roll’d down the light,
      And on the shaded ocean rush’d the night;
      Our men, secure, nor guards nor sentries held,
      But easy sleep their weary limbs compell’d.
      The Grecians had embark’d their naval pow’rs
      From Tenedos, and sought our well-known shores,
      Safe under covert of the silent night,
      And guided by th’ imperial galley’s light;
      When Sinon, favour’d by the partial gods,
      Unlock’d the horse, and op’d his dark abodes;
      Restor’d to vital air our hidden foes,
      Who joyful from their long confinement rose.
      Tysander bold, and Sthenelus their guide,
      And dire Ulysses down the cable slide:
      Then Thoas, Athamas, and Pyrrhus haste;
      Nor was the Podalirian hero last,
      Nor injur’d Menelaus, nor the fam’d
      Epeus, who the fatal engine fram’d.
      A nameless crowd succeed; their forces join
      T’ invade the town, oppress’d with sleep and wine.
      Those few they find awake first meet their fate;
      Then to their fellows they unbar the gate.

      “’Twas in the dead of night, when sleep repairs
      Our bodies worn with toils, our minds with cares,
      When Hector’s ghost before my sight appears:
      A bloody shroud he seem’d, and bath’d in tears;
      Such as he was, when, by Pelides slain,
      Thessalian coursers dragg’d him o’er the plain.
      Swoln were his feet, as when the thongs were thrust
      Thro’ the bor’d holes; his body black with dust;
      Unlike that Hector who return’d from toils
      Of war, triumphant, in Aeacian spoils,
      Or him who made the fainting Greeks retire,
      And launch’d against their navy Phrygian fire.
      His hair and beard stood stiffen’d with his gore;
      And all the wounds he for his country bore
      Now stream’d afresh, and with new purple ran.
      I wept to see the visionary man,
      And, while my trance continued, thus began:
      ‘O light of Trojans, and support of Troy,
      Thy father’s champion, and thy country’s joy!
      O, long expected by thy friends! from whence
      Art thou so late return’d for our defence?
      Do we behold thee, wearied as we are
      With length of labours, and with toils of war?
      After so many fun’rals of thy own
      Art thou restor’d to thy declining town?
      But say, what wounds are these? What new disgrace
      Deforms the manly features of thy face?’

      “To this the spectre no reply did frame,
      But answer’d to the cause for which he came,
      And, groaning from the bottom of his breast,
      This warning in these mournful words express’d:
      ‘O goddess-born! escape, by timely flight,
      The flames and horrors of this fatal night.
      The foes already have possess’d the wall;
      Troy nods from high, and totters to her fall.
      Enough is paid to Priam’s royal name,
      More than enough to duty and to fame.
      If by a mortal hand my father’s throne
      Could be defended, ’twas by mine alone.
      Now Troy to thee commends her future state,
      And gives her gods companions of thy fate:
      From their assistance walls expect,
      Which, wand’ring long, at last thou shalt erect.’
      He said, and brought me, from their blest abodes,
      The venerable statues of the gods,
      With ancient Vesta from the sacred choir,
      The wreaths and relics of th’ immortal fire.

      “Now peals of shouts come thund’ring from afar,
      Cries, threats, and loud laments, and mingled war:
      The noise approaches, tho’ our palace stood
      Aloof from streets, encompass’d with a wood.
      Louder, and yet more loud, I hear th’ alarms
      Of human cries distinct, and clashing arms.
      Fear broke my slumbers; I no longer stay,
      But mount the terrace, thence the town survey,
      And hearken what the frightful sounds convey.
      Thus, when a flood of fire by wind is borne,
      Crackling it rolls, and mows the standing corn;
      Or deluges, descending on the plains,
      Sweep o’er the yellow ear, destroy the pains
      Of lab’ring oxen and the peasant’s gains;
      Unroot the forest oaks, and bear away
      Flocks, folds, and trees, and undistinguish’d prey:
      The shepherd climbs the cliff, and sees from far
      The wasteful ravage of the wat’ry war.
      Then Hector’s faith was manifestly clear’d,
      And Grecian frauds in open light appear’d.
      The palace of Deiphobus ascends
      In smoky flames, and catches on his friends.
      Ucalegon burns next: the seas are bright
      With splendour not their own, and shine with Trojan light.
      New clamours and new clangours now arise,
      The sound of trumpets mix’d with fighting cries.
      With frenzy seiz’d, I run to meet th’ alarms,
      Resolv’d on death, resolv’d to die in arms,
      But first to gather friends, with them t’ oppose
      If fortune favour’d, and repel the foes;
      Spurr’d by my courage, by my country fir’d,
      With sense of honour and revenge inspir’d.

      “Pantheus, Apollo’s priest, a sacred name,
      Had scap’d the Grecian swords, and pass’d the flame:
      With relics loaden, to my doors he fled,
      And by the hand his tender grandson led.
      ‘What hope, O Pantheus? whither can we run?
      Where make a stand? and what may yet be done?’
      Scarce had I said, when Pantheus, with a groan:
      ‘Troy is no more, and Ilium was a town!
      The fatal day, th’ appointed hour, is come,
      When wrathful Jove’s irrevocable doom
      Transfers the Trojan state to Grecian hands.
      The fire consumes the town, the foe commands;
      And armed hosts, an unexpected force,
      Break from the bowels of the fatal horse.
      Within the gates, proud Sinon throws about
      The flames; and foes for entrance press without,
      With thousand others, whom I fear to name,
      More than from Argos or Mycenae came.
      To sev’ral posts their parties they divide;
      Some block the narrow streets, some scour the wide:
      The bold they kill, th’ unwary they surprise;
      Who fights finds death, and death finds him who flies.
      The warders of the gate but scarce maintain
      Th’ unequal combat, and resist in vain.’

      “I heard; and Heav’n, that well-born souls inspires,
      Prompts me thro’ lifted swords and rising fires
      To run where clashing arms and clamour calls,
      And rush undaunted to defend the walls.
      Ripheus and Iph’itas by my side engage,
      For valour one renown’d, and one for age.
      Dymas and Hypanis by moonlight knew
      My motions and my mien, and to my party drew;
      With young Coroebus, who by love was led
      To win renown and fair Cassandra’s bed,
      And lately brought his troops to Priam’s aid,
      Forewarn’d in vain by the prophetic maid.
      Whom when I saw resolv’d in arms to fall,
      And that one spirit animated all:
      ‘Brave souls!’ said I, ‘but brave, alas! in vain:
      Come, finish what our cruel fates ordain.
      You see the desp’rate state of our affairs,
      And heav’n’s protecting pow’rs are deaf to pray’rs.
      The passive gods behold the Greeks defile
      Their temples, and abandon to the spoil
      Their own abodes: we, feeble few, conspire
      To save a sinking town, involv’d in fire.
      Then let us fall, but fall amidst our foes:
      Despair of life the means of living shows.’
      So bold a speech incourag’d their desire
      Of death, and added fuel to their fire.

      “As hungry wolves, with raging appetite,
      Scour thro’ the fields, nor fear the stormy night;
      Their whelps at home expect the promis’d food,
      And long to temper their dry chaps in blood:
      So rush’d we forth at once; resolv’d to die,
      Resolv’d, in death, the last extremes to try.
      We leave the narrow lanes behind, and dare
      Th’ unequal combat in the public square:
      Night was our friend; our leader was despair.
      What tongue can tell the slaughter of that night?
      What eyes can weep the sorrows and affright?
      An ancient and imperial city falls:
      The streets are fill’d with frequent funerals;
      Houses and holy temples float in blood,
      And hostile nations make a common flood.
      Not only Trojans fall; but, in their turn,
      The vanquish’d triumph, and the victors mourn.
      Ours take new courage from despair and night:
      Confus’d the fortune is, confus’d the fight.
      All parts resound with tumults, plaints, and fears;
      And grisly Death in sundry shapes appears.
      Androgeos fell among us, with his band,
      Who thought us Grecians newly come to land.
      ‘From whence,’ said he, ‘my friends, this long delay?
      You loiter, while the spoils are borne away:
      Our ships are laden with the Trojan store;
      And you, like truants, come too late ashore.’
      He said, but soon corrected his mistake,
      Found, by the doubtful answers which we make:
      Amaz’d, he would have shunn’d th’ unequal fight;
      But we, more num’rous, intercept his flight.
      As when some peasant, in a bushy brake,
      Has with unwary footing press’d a snake;
      He starts aside, astonish’d, when he spies
      His rising crest, blue neck, and rolling eyes;
      So from our arms surpris’d Androgeos flies.
      In vain; for him and his we compass’d round,
      Possess’d with fear, unknowing of the ground,
      And of their lives an easy conquest found.
      Thus Fortune on our first endeavor smil’d.
      Coroebus then, with youthful hopes beguil’d,
      Swoln with success, and a daring mind,
      This new invention fatally design’d.
      ‘My friends,’ said he, ‘since Fortune shows the way,
      ’Tis fit we should th’ auspicious guide obey.
      For what has she these Grecian arms bestow’d,
      But their destruction, and the Trojans’ good?
      Then change we shields, and their devices bear:
      Let fraud supply the want of force in war.
      They find us arms.’ This said, himself he dress’d
      In dead Androgeos’ spoils, his upper vest,
      His painted buckler, and his plumy crest.
      Thus Ripheus, Dymas, all the Trojan train,
      Lay down their own attire, and strip the slain.
      Mix’d with the Greeks, we go with ill presage,
      Flatter’d with hopes to glut our greedy rage;
      Unknown, assaulting whom we blindly meet,
      And strew with Grecian carcasses the street.
      Thus while their straggling parties we defeat,
      Some to the shore and safer ships retreat;
      And some, oppress’d with more ignoble fear,
      Remount the hollow horse, and pant in secret there.

      “But, ah! what use of valour can be made,
      When heav’n’s propitious pow’rs refuse their aid!
      Behold the royal prophetess, the fair
      Cassandra, dragg’d by her dishevel’d hair,
      Whom not Minerva’s shrine, nor sacred bands,
      In safety could protect from sacrilegious hands:
      On heav’n she cast her eyes, she sigh’d, she cried,
      (’Twas all she could) her tender arms were tied.
      So sad a sight Coroebus could not bear;
      But, fir’d with rage, distracted with despair,
      Amid the barb’rous ravishers he flew:
      Our leader’s rash example we pursue.
      But storms of stones, from the proud temple’s height,
      Pour down, and on our batter’d helms alight:
      We from our friends receiv’d this fatal blow,
      Who thought us Grecians, as we seem’d in show.
      They aim at the mistaken crests, from high;
      And ours beneath the pond’rous ruin lie.
      Then, mov’d with anger and disdain, to see
      Their troops dispers’d, the royal virgin free,
      The Grecians rally, and their pow’rs unite,
      With fury charge us, and renew the fight.
      The brother kings with Ajax join their force,
      And the whole squadron of Thessalian horse.

      “Thus, when the rival winds their quarrel try,
      Contending for the kingdom of the sky,
      South, east, and west, on airy coursers borne;
      The whirlwind gathers, and the woods are torn:
      Then Nereus strikes the deep; the billows rise,
      And, mix’d with ooze and sand, pollute the skies.
      The troops we squander’d first again appear
      From several quarters, and enclose the rear.
      They first observe, and to the rest betray,
      Our diff’rent speech; our borrow’d arms survey.
      Oppress’d with odds, we fall; Coroebus first,
      At Pallas’ altar, by Peneleus pierc’d.
      Then Ripheus follow’d, in th’ unequal fight;
      Just of his word, observant of the right:
      Heav’n thought not so. Dymas their fate attends,
      With Hypanis, mistaken by their friends.
      Nor, Pantheus, thee, thy mitre, nor the bands
      Of awful Phoebus, sav’d from impious hands.
      Ye Trojan flames, your testimony bear,
      What I perform’d, and what I suffer’d there;
      No sword avoiding in the fatal strife,
      Expos’d to death, and prodigal of life;
      Witness, ye heavens! I live not by my fault:
      I strove to have deserv’d the death I sought.
      But, when I could not fight, and would have died,
      Borne off to distance by the growing tide,
      Old Iphitus and I were hurried thence,
      With Pelias wounded, and without defence.
      New clamours from th’ invested palace ring:
      We run to die, or disengage the king.
      So hot th’ assault, so high the tumult rose,
      While ours defend, and while the Greeks oppose
      As all the Dardan and Argolic race
      Had been contracted in that narrow space;
      Or as all Ilium else were void of fear,
      And tumult, war, and slaughter, only there.
      Their targets in a tortoise cast, the foes,
      Secure advancing, to the turrets rose:
      Some mount the scaling ladders; some, more bold,
      Swerve upwards, and by posts and pillars hold;
      Their left hand gripes their bucklers in th’ ascent,
      While with their right they seize the battlement.
      From their demolish’d tow’rs the Trojans throw
      Huge heaps of stones, that, falling, crush the foe;
      And heavy beams and rafters from the sides
      (Such arms their last necessity provides)
      And gilded roofs, come tumbling from on high,
      The marks of state and ancient royalty.
      The guards below, fix’d in the pass, attend
      The charge undaunted, and the gate defend.
      Renew’d in courage with recover’d breath,
      A second time we ran to tempt our death,
      To clear the palace from the foe, succeed
      The weary living, and revenge the dead.

      “A postern door, yet unobserv’d and free,
      Join’d by the length of a blind gallery,
      To the king’s closet led: a way well known
      To Hector’s wife, while Priam held the throne,
      Thro’ which she brought Astyanax, unseen,
      To cheer his grandsire and his grandsire’s queen.
      Thro’ this we pass, and mount the tow’r, from whence
      With unavailing arms the Trojans make defence.
      From this the trembling king had oft descried
      The Grecian camp, and saw their navy ride.
      Beams from its lofty height with swords we hew,
      Then, wrenching with our hands, th’ assault renew;
      And, where the rafters on the columns meet,
      We push them headlong with our arms and feet.
      The lightning flies not swifter than the fall,
      Nor thunder louder than the ruin’d wall:
      Down goes the top at once; the Greeks beneath
      Are piecemeal torn, or pounded into death.
      Yet more succeed, and more to death are sent;
      We cease not from above, nor they below relent.
      Before the gate stood Pyrrhus, threat’ning loud,
      With glitt’ring arms conspicuous in the crowd.
      So shines, renew’d in youth, the crested snake,
      Who slept the winter in a thorny brake,
      And, casting off his slough when spring returns,
      Now looks aloft, and with new glory burns;
      Restor’d with poisonous herbs, his ardent sides
      Reflect the sun; and rais’d on spires he rides;
      High o’er the grass, hissing he rolls along,
      And brandishes by fits his forky tongue.
      Proud Periphas, and fierce Automedon,
      His father’s charioteer, together run
      To force the gate; the Scyrian infantry
      Rush on in crowds, and the barr’d passage free.
      Ent’ring the court, with shouts the skies they rend;
      And flaming firebrands to the roofs ascend.
      Himself, among the foremost, deals his blows,
      And with his ax repeated strokes bestows
      On the strong doors; then all their shoulders ply,
      Till from the posts the brazen hinges fly.
      He hews apace; the double bars at length
      Yield to his ax and unresisted strength.
      A mighty breach is made: the rooms conceal’d
      Appear, and all the palace is reveal’d;
      The halls of audience, and of public state,
      And where the lonely queen in secret sate.
      Arm’d soldiers now by trembling maids are seen,
      With not a door, and scarce a space, between.
      The house is fill’d with loud laments and cries,
      And shrieks of women rend the vaulted skies;
      The fearful matrons run from place to place,
      And kiss the thresholds, and the posts embrace.
      The fatal work inhuman Pyrrhus plies,
      And all his father sparkles in his eyes;
      Nor bars, nor fighting guards, his force sustain:
      The bars are broken, and the guards are slain.
      In rush the Greeks, and all the apartments fill;
      Those few defendants whom they find, they kill.
      Not with so fierce a rage the foaming flood
      Roars, when he finds his rapid course withstood;
      Bears down the dams with unresisted sway,
      And sweeps the cattle and the cots away.
      These eyes beheld him when he march’d between
      The brother kings: I saw th’ unhappy queen,
      The hundred wives, and where old Priam stood,
      To stain his hallow’d altar with his brood.
      The fifty nuptial beds (such hopes had he,
      So large a promise, of a progeny),
      The posts, of plated gold, and hung with spoils,
      Fell the reward of the proud victor’s toils.
      Where’er the raging fire had left a space,
      The Grecians enter and possess the place.

      “Perhaps you may of Priam’s fate enquire.
      He, when he saw his regal town on fire,
      His ruin’d palace, and his ent’ring foes,
      On ev’ry side inevitable woes,
      In arms, disus’d, invests his limbs, decay’d,
      Like them, with age; a late and useless aid.
      His feeble shoulders scarce the weight sustain;
      Loaded, not arm’d, he creeps along with pain,
      Despairing of success, ambitious to be slain!
      Uncover’d but by heav’n, there stood in view
      An altar; near the hearth a laurel grew,
      Dodder’d with age, whose boughs encompass round
      The household gods, and shade the holy ground.
      Here Hecuba, with all her helpless train
      Of dames, for shelter sought, but sought in vain.
      Driv’n like a flock of doves along the sky,
      Their images they hug, and to their altars fly.
      The Queen, when she beheld her trembling lord,
      And hanging by his side a heavy sword,
      ‘What rage,’ she cried, ‘has seiz’d my husband’s mind?
      What arms are these, and to what use design’d?
      These times want other aids! Were Hector here,
      Ev’n Hector now in vain, like Priam, would appear.
      With us, one common shelter thou shalt find,
      Or in one common fate with us be join’d.’
      She said, and with a last salute embrac’d
      The poor old man, and by the laurel plac’d.
      Behold! Polites, one of Priam’s sons,
      Pursued by Pyrrhus, there for safety runs.
      Thro’ swords and foes, amaz’d and hurt, he flies
      Thro’ empty courts and open galleries.
      Him Pyrrhus, urging with his lance, pursues,
      And often reaches, and his thrusts renews.
      The youth, transfix’d, with lamentable cries,
      Expires before his wretched parent’s eyes:
      Whom gasping at his feet when Priam saw,
      The fear of death gave place to nature’s law;
      And, shaking more with anger than with age,
      ‘The gods,’ said he, ‘requite thy brutal rage!
      As sure they will, barbarian, sure they must,
      If there be gods in heav’n, and gods be just:
      Who tak’st in wrongs an insolent delight;
      With a son’s death t’ infect a father’s sight.
      Not he, whom thou and lying fame conspire
      To call thee his; not he, thy vaunted sire,
      Thus us’d my wretched age: the gods he fear’d,
      The laws of nature and of nations heard.
      He cheer’d my sorrows, and, for sums of gold,
      The bloodless carcass of my Hector sold;
      Pitied the woes a parent underwent,
      And sent me back in safety from his tent.’

      “This said, his feeble hand a javelin threw,
      Which, flutt’ring, seem’d to loiter as it flew:
      Just, and but barely, to the mark it held,
      And faintly tinkled on the brazen shield.

      “Then Pyrrhus thus: ‘Go thou from me to fate,
      And to my father my foul deeds relate.
      Now die!’ With that he dragg’d the trembling sire,
      Slidd’ring thro’ clotter’d blood and holy mire,
      (The mingled paste his murder’d son had made,)
      Haul’d from beneath the violated shade,
      And on the sacred pile the royal victim laid.
      His right hand held his bloody falchion bare,
      His left he twisted in his hoary hair;
      Then, with a speeding thrust, his heart he found:
      The lukewarm blood came rushing thro’ the wound,
      And sanguine streams distain’d the sacred ground.
      Thus Priam fell, and shar’d one common fate
      With Troy in ashes, and his ruin’d state:
      He, who the scepter of all Asia sway’d,
      Whom monarchs like domestic slaves obey’d.
      On the bleak shore now lies th’ abandon’d king,
      A headless carcass, and a nameless thing.

      “Then, not before, I felt my curdled blood
      Congeal with fear, my hair with horror stood:
      My father’s image fill’d my pious mind,
      Lest equal years might equal fortune find.
      Again I thought on my forsaken wife,
      And trembled for my son’s abandon’d life.
      I look’d about, but found myself alone,
      Deserted at my need! My friends were gone.
      Some spent with toil, some with despair oppress’d,
      Leap’d headlong from the heights; the flames consum’d the rest.
      Thus, wand’ring in my way, without a guide,
      The graceless Helen in the porch I spied
      Of Vesta’s temple; there she lurk’d alone;
      Muffled she sate, and, what she could, unknown:
      But, by the flames that cast their blaze around,
      That common bane of Greece and Troy I found.
      For Ilium burnt, she dreads the Trojan sword;
      More dreads the vengeance of her injur’d lord;
      Ev’n by those gods who refug’d her abhorr’d.
      Trembling with rage, the strumpet I regard,
      Resolv’d to give her guilt the due reward:
      ‘Shall she triumphant sail before the wind,
      And leave in flames unhappy Troy behind?
      Shall she her kingdom and her friends review,
      In state attended with a captive crew,
      While unreveng’d the good old Priam falls,
      And Grecian fires consume the Trojan walls?
      For this the Phrygian fields and Xanthian flood
      Were swell’d with bodies, and were drunk with blood?
      ’Tis true, a soldier can small honour gain,
      And boast no conquest, from a woman slain:
      Yet shall the fact not pass without applause,
      Of vengeance taken in so just a cause;
      The punish’d crime shall set my soul at ease,
      And murm’ring manes of my friends appease.’
      Thus while I rave, a gleam of pleasing light
      Spread o’er the place; and, shining heav’nly bright,
      My mother stood reveal’d before my sight
      Never so radiant did her eyes appear;
      Not her own star confess’d a light so clear:
      Great in her charms, as when on gods above
      She looks, and breathes herself into their love.
      She held my hand, the destin’d blow to break;
      Then from her rosy lips began to speak:
      ‘My son, from whence this madness, this neglect
      Of my commands, and those whom I protect?
      Why this unmanly rage? Recall to mind
      Whom you forsake, what pledges leave behind.
      Look if your helpless father yet survive,
      Or if Ascanius or Creusa live.
      Around your house the greedy Grecians err;
      And these had perish’d in the nightly war,
      But for my presence and protecting care.
      Not Helen’s face, nor Paris, was in fault;
      But by the gods was this destruction brought.
      Now cast your eyes around, while I dissolve
      The mists and films that mortal eyes involve,
      Purge from your sight the dross, and make you see
      The shape of each avenging deity.
      Enlighten’d thus, my just commands fulfil,
      Nor fear obedience to your mother’s will.
      Where yon disorder’d heap of ruin lies,
      Stones rent from stones; where clouds of dust arise,
      Amid that smother Neptune holds his place,
      Below the wall’s foundation drives his mace,
      And heaves the building from the solid base.
      Look where, in arms, imperial Juno stands
      Full in the Scaean gate, with loud commands,
      Urging on shore the tardy Grecian bands.
      See! Pallas, of her snaky buckler proud,
      Bestrides the tow’r, refulgent thro’ the cloud:
      See! Jove new courage to the foe supplies,
      And arms against the town the partial deities.
      Haste hence, my son; this fruitless labour end:
      Haste, where your trembling spouse and sire attend:
      Haste; and a mother’s care your passage shall befriend.’
      She said, and swiftly vanish’d from my sight,
      Obscure in clouds and gloomy shades of night.
      I look’d, I listen’d; dreadful sounds I hear;
      And the dire forms of hostile gods appear.
      Troy sunk in flames I saw, nor could prevent;
      And Ilium from its old foundations rent;
      Rent like a mountain ash, which dar’d the winds,
      And stood the sturdy strokes of lab’ring hinds.
      About the roots the cruel ax resounds;
      The stumps are pierc’d with oft-repeated wounds:
      The war is felt on high; the nodding crown
      Now threats a fall, and throws the leafy honours down.
      To their united force it yields, tho’ late,
      And mourns with mortal groans th’ approaching fate:
      The roots no more their upper load sustain;
      But down she falls, and spreads a ruin thro’ the plain.

      “Descending thence, I scape thro’ foes and fire:
      Before the goddess, foes and flames retire.
      Arriv’d at home, he, for whose only sake,
      Or most for his, such toils I undertake,
      The good Anchises, whom, by timely flight,
      I purpos’d to secure on Ida’s height,
      Refus’d the journey, resolute to die
      And add his fun’rals to the fate of Troy,
      Rather than exile and old age sustain.
      ‘Go you, whose blood runs warm in ev’ry vein.
      Had Heav’n decreed that I should life enjoy,
      Heav’n had decreed to save unhappy Troy.
      ’Tis, sure, enough, if not too much, for one,
      Twice to have seen our Ilium overthrown.
      Make haste to save the poor remaining crew,
      And give this useless corpse a long adieu.
      These weak old hands suffice to stop my breath;
      At least the pitying foes will aid my death,
      To take my spoils, and leave my body bare:
      As for my sepulcher, let Heav’n take care.
      ’Tis long since I, for my celestial wife
      Loath’d by the gods, have dragg’d a ling’ring life;
      Since ev’ry hour and moment I expire,
      Blasted from heav’n by Jove’s avenging fire.’
      This oft repeated, he stood fix’d to die:
      Myself, my wife, my son, my family,
      Intreat, pray, beg, and raise a doleful cry.
      ‘What, will he still persist, on death resolve,
      And in his ruin all his house involve!’
      He still persists his reasons to maintain;
      Our pray’rs, our tears, our loud laments, are vain.

      “Urg’d by despair, again I go to try
      The fate of arms, resolv’d in fight to die:
      ‘What hope remains, but what my death must give?
      Can I, without so dear a father, live?
      You term it prudence, what I baseness call:
      Could such a word from such a parent fall?
      If Fortune please, and so the gods ordain,
      That nothing should of ruin’d Troy remain,
      And you conspire with Fortune to be slain,
      The way to death is wide, th’ approaches near:
      For soon relentless Pyrrhus will appear,
      Reeking with Priam’s blood: the wretch who slew
      The son (inhuman) in the father’s view,
      And then the sire himself to the dire altar drew.
      O goddess mother, give me back to Fate;
      Your gift was undesir’d, and came too late!
      Did you, for this, unhappy me convey
      Thro’ foes and fires, to see my house a prey?
      Shall I my father, wife, and son behold,
      Welt’ring in blood, each other’s arms infold?
      Haste! gird my sword, tho’ spent and overcome:
      ’Tis the last summons to receive our doom.
      I hear thee, Fate; and I obey thy call!
      Not unreveng’d the foe shall see my fall.
      Restore me to the yet unfinish’d fight:
      My death is wanting to conclude the night.’
      Arm’d once again, my glitt’ring sword I wield,
      While th’ other hand sustains my weighty shield,
      And forth I rush to seek th’ abandon’d field.
      I went; but sad Creusa stopp’d my way,
      And cross the threshold in my passage lay,
      Embrac’d my knees, and, when I would have gone,
      Shew’d me my feeble sire and tender son:
      ‘If death be your design, at least,’ said she,
      ‘Take us along to share your destiny.
      If any farther hopes in arms remain,
      This place, these pledges of your love, maintain.
      To whom do you expose your father’s life,
      Your son’s, and mine, your now forgotten wife!’
      While thus she fills the house with clam’rous cries,
      Our hearing is diverted by our eyes:
      For, while I held my son, in the short space
      Betwixt our kisses and our last embrace;
      Strange to relate, from young Iulus’ head
      A lambent flame arose, which gently spread
      Around his brows, and on his temples fed.
      Amaz’d, with running water we prepare
      To quench the sacred fire, and slake his hair;
      But old Anchises, vers’d in omens, rear’d
      His hands to heav’n, and this request preferr’d:
      ‘If any vows, almighty Jove, can bend
      Thy will; if piety can pray’rs commend,
      Confirm the glad presage which thou art pleas’d to send.’
      Scarce had he said, when, on our left, we hear
      A peal of rattling thunder roll in air:
      There shot a streaming lamp along the sky,
      Which on the winged lightning seem’d to fly;
      From o’er the roof the blaze began to move,
      And, trailing, vanish’d in th’ Idaean grove.
      It swept a path in heav’n, and shone a guide,
      Then in a steaming stench of sulphur died.

      “The good old man with suppliant hands implor’d
      The gods’ protection, and their star ador’d.
      ‘Now, now,’ said he, ‘my son, no more delay!
      I yield, I follow where Heav’n shews the way.
      Keep, O my country gods, our dwelling place,
      And guard this relic of the Trojan race,
      This tender child! These omens are your own,
      And you can yet restore the ruin’d town.
      At least accomplish what your signs foreshow:
      I stand resign’d, and am prepar’d to go.’

      “He said. The crackling flames appear on high.
      And driving sparkles dance along the sky.
      With Vulcan’s rage the rising winds conspire,
      And near our palace roll the flood of fire.
      ‘Haste, my dear father, (’tis no time to wait,)
      And load my shoulders with a willing freight.
      Whate’er befalls, your life shall be my care;
      One death, or one deliv’rance, we will share.
      My hand shall lead our little son; and you,
      My faithful consort, shall our steps pursue.
      Next, you, my servants, heed my strict commands:
      Without the walls a ruin’d temple stands,
      To Ceres hallow’d once; a cypress nigh
      Shoots up her venerable head on high,
      By long religion kept; there bend your feet,
      And in divided parties let us meet.
      Our country gods, the relics, and the bands,
      Hold you, my father, in your guiltless hands:
      In me ’tis impious holy things to bear,
      Red as I am with slaughter, new from war,
      Till in some living stream I cleanse the guilt
      Of dire debate, and blood in battle spilt.’
      Thus, ord’ring all that prudence could provide,
      I clothe my shoulders with a lion’s hide
      And yellow spoils; then, on my bending back,
      The welcome load of my dear father take;
      While on my better hand Ascanius hung,
      And with unequal paces tripp’d along.
      Creusa kept behind; by choice we stray
      Thro’ ev’ry dark and ev’ry devious way.
      I, who so bold and dauntless just before,
      The Grecian darts and shock of lances bore,
      At ev’ry shadow now am seiz’d with fear,
      Not for myself, but for the charge I bear;
      Till, near the ruin’d gate arriv’d at last,
      Secure, and deeming all the danger past,
      A frightful noise of trampling feet we hear.
      My father, looking thro’ the shades, with fear,
      Cried out: ‘Haste, haste, my son, the foes are nigh;
      Their swords and shining armour I descry.’
      Some hostile god, for some unknown offence,
      Had sure bereft my mind of better sense;
      For, while thro’ winding ways I took my flight,
      And sought the shelter of the gloomy night,
      Alas! I lost Creusa: hard to tell
      If by her fatal destiny she fell,
      Or weary sate, or wander’d with affright;
      But she was lost for ever to my sight.
      I knew not, or reflected, till I meet
      My friends, at Ceres’ now deserted seat.
      We met: not one was wanting; only she
      Deceiv’d her friends, her son, and wretched me.

      “What mad expressions did my tongue refuse!
      Whom did I not, of gods or men, accuse!
      This was the fatal blow, that pain’d me more
      Than all I felt from ruin’d Troy before.
      Stung with my loss, and raving with despair,
      Abandoning my now forgotten care,
      Of counsel, comfort, and of hope bereft,
      My sire, my son, my country gods I left.
      In shining armour once again I sheathe
      My limbs, not feeling wounds, nor fearing death.
      Then headlong to the burning walls I run,
      And seek the danger I was forc’d to shun.
      I tread my former tracks; thro’ night explore
      Each passage, ev’ry street I cross’d before.
      All things were full of horror and affright,
      And dreadful ev’n the silence of the night.
      Then to my father’s house I make repair,
      With some small glimpse of hope to find her there.
      Instead of her, the cruel Greeks I met;
      The house was fill’d with foes, with flames beset.
      Driv’n on the wings of winds, whole sheets of fire,
      Thro’ air transported, to the roofs aspire.
      From thence to Priam’s palace I resort,
      And search the citadel and desert court.
      Then, unobserv’d, I pass by Juno’s church:
      A guard of Grecians had possess’d the porch;
      There Phoenix and Ulysses watch the prey,
      And thither all the wealth of Troy convey:
      The spoils which they from ransack’d houses brought,
      And golden bowls from burning altars caught,
      The tables of the gods, the purple vests,
      The people’s treasure, and the pomp of priests.
      A rank of wretched youths, with pinion’d hands,
      And captive matrons, in long order stands.
      Then, with ungovern’d madness, I proclaim,
      Thro’ all the silent street, Creusa’s name:
      Creusa still I call; at length she hears,
      And sudden thro’ the shades of night appears.
      Appears, no more Creusa, nor my wife,
      But a pale spectre, larger than the life.
      Aghast, astonish’d, and struck dumb with fear,
      I stood; like bristles rose my stiffen’d hair.
      Then thus the ghost began to soothe my grief
      ‘Nor tears, nor cries, can give the dead relief.
      Desist, my much-lov’d lord, t’ indulge your pain;
      You bear no more than what the gods ordain.
      My fates permit me not from hence to fly;
      Nor he, the great controller of the sky.
      Long wand’ring ways for you the pow’rs decree;
      On land hard labours, and a length of sea.
      Then, after many painful years are past,
      On Latium’s happy shore you shall be cast,
      Where gentle Tiber from his bed beholds
      The flow’ry meadows, and the feeding folds.
      There end your toils; and there your fates provide
      A quiet kingdom, and a royal bride:
      There fortune shall the Trojan line restore,
      And you for lost Creusa weep no more.
      Fear not that I shall watch, with servile shame,
      Th’ imperious looks of some proud Grecian dame;
      Or, stooping to the victor’s lust, disgrace
      My goddess mother, or my royal race.
      And now, farewell! The parent of the gods
      Restrains my fleeting soul in her abodes:
      I trust our common issue to your care.’
      She said, and gliding pass’d unseen in air.
      I strove to speak: but horror tied my tongue;
      And thrice about her neck my arms I flung,
      And, thrice deceiv’d, on vain embraces hung.
      Light as an empty dream at break of day,
      Or as a blast of wind, she rush’d away.

      “Thus having pass’d the night in fruitless pain,
      I to my longing friends return again,
      Amaz’d th’ augmented number to behold,
      Of men and matrons mix’d, of young and old;
      A wretched exil’d crew together brought,
      With arms appointed, and with treasure fraught,
      Resolv’d, and willing, under my command,
      To run all hazards both of sea and land.
      The Morn began, from Ida, to display
      Her rosy cheeks; and Phosphor led the day:
      Before the gates the Grecians took their post,
      And all pretence of late relief was lost.
      I yield to Fate, unwillingly retire,
      And, loaded, up the hill convey my sire.”



 


      When Heav’n had overturn’d the Trojan state
      And Priam’s throne, by too severe a fate;
      When ruin’d Troy became the Grecians’ prey,
      And Ilium’s lofty tow’rs in ashes lay;
      Warn’d by celestial omens, we retreat,
      To seek in foreign lands a happier seat.
      Near old Antandros, and at Ida’s foot,
      The timber of the sacred groves we cut,
      And build our fleet; uncertain yet to find
      What place the gods for our repose assign’d.
      Friends daily flock; and scarce the kindly spring
      Began to clothe the ground, and birds to sing,
      When old Anchises summon’d all to sea:
      The crew my father and the Fates obey.
      With sighs and tears I leave my native shore,
      And empty fields, where Ilium stood before.
      My sire, my son, our less and greater gods,
      All sail at once, and cleave the briny floods.

      “Against our coast appears a spacious land,
      Which once the fierce Lycurgus did command,
      Thracia the name; the people bold in war;
      Vast are their fields, and tillage is their care,
      A hospitable realm while Fate was kind,
      With Troy in friendship and religion join’d.
      I land; with luckless omens, then adore
      Their gods, and draw a line along the shore;
      I lay the deep foundations of a wall,
      And Aenos, nam’d from me, the city call.
      To Dionaean Venus vows are paid,
      And all the pow’rs that rising labours aid;
      A bull on Jove’s imperial altar laid.
      Not far, a rising hillock stood in view;
      Sharp myrtles on the sides, and cornels grew.
      There, while I went to crop the sylvan scenes,
      And shade our altar with their leafy greens,
      I pull’d a plant; with horror I relate
      A prodigy so strange and full of fate.
      The rooted fibers rose, and from the wound
      Black bloody drops distill’d upon the ground.
      Mute and amaz’d, my hair with terror stood;
      Fear shrunk my sinews, and congeal’d my blood.
      Mann’d once again, another plant I try:
      That other gush’d with the same sanguine dye.
      Then, fearing guilt for some offence unknown,
      With pray’rs and vows the Dryads I atone,
      With all the sisters of the woods, and most
      The God of Arms, who rules the Thracian coast,
      That they, or he, these omens would avert,
      Release our fears, and better signs impart.
      Clear’d, as I thought, and fully fix’d at length
      To learn the cause, I tugged with all my strength:
      I bent my knees against the ground; once more
      The violated myrtle ran with gore.
      Scarce dare I tell the sequel: from the womb
      Of wounded earth, and caverns of the tomb,
      A groan, as of a troubled ghost, renew’d
      My fright, and then these dreadful words ensued:
      ‘Why dost thou thus my buried body rend?
      O spare the corpse of thy unhappy friend!
      Spare to pollute thy pious hands with blood:
      The tears distil not from the wounded wood;
      But ev’ry drop this living tree contains
      Is kindred blood, and ran in Trojan veins.
      O fly from this unhospitable shore,
      Warn’d by my fate; for I am Polydore!
      Here loads of lances, in my blood embrued,
      Again shoot upward, by my blood renew’d.’

      “My falt’ring tongue and shiv’ring limbs declare
      My horror, and in bristles rose my hair.
      When Troy with Grecian arms was closely pent,
      Old Priam, fearful of the war’s event,
      This hapless Polydore to Thracia sent:
      Loaded with gold, he sent his darling, far
      From noise and tumults, and destructive war,
      Committed to the faithless tyrant’s care;
      Who, when he saw the pow’r of Troy decline,
      Forsook the weaker, with the strong to join;
      Broke ev’ry bond of nature and of truth,
      And murder’d, for his wealth, the royal youth.
      O sacred hunger of pernicious gold!
      What bands of faith can impious lucre hold?
      Now, when my soul had shaken off her fears,
      I call my father and the Trojan peers;
      Relate the prodigies of Heav’n, require
      What he commands, and their advice desire.
      All vote to leave that execrable shore,
      Polluted with the blood of Polydore;
      But, ere we sail, his fun’ral rites prepare,
      Then, to his ghost, a tomb and altars rear.
      In mournful pomp the matrons walk the round,
      With baleful cypress and blue fillets crown’d,
      With eyes dejected, and with hair unbound.
      Then bowls of tepid milk and blood we pour,
      And thrice invoke the soul of Polydore.

      “Now, when the raging storms no longer reign,
      But southern gales invite us to the main,
      We launch our vessels, with a prosp’rous wind,
      And leave the cities and the shores behind.

      “An island in th’ Aegaean main appears;
      Neptune and wat’ry Doris claim it theirs.
      It floated once, till Phoebus fix’d the sides
      To rooted earth, and now it braves the tides.
      Here, borne by friendly winds, we come ashore,
      With needful ease our weary limbs restore,
      And the Sun’s temple and his town adore.

      “Anius, the priest and king, with laurel crown’d,
      His hoary locks with purple fillets bound,
      Who saw my sire the Delian shore ascend,
      Came forth with eager haste to meet his friend;
      Invites him to his palace; and, in sign
      Of ancient love, their plighted hands they join.
      Then to the temple of the god I went,
      And thus, before the shrine, my vows present:
      ‘Give, O Thymbraeus, give a resting place
      To the sad relics of the Trojan race;
      A seat secure, a region of their own,
      A lasting empire, and a happier town.
      Where shall we fix? where shall our labours end?
      Whom shall we follow, and what fate attend?
      Let not my pray’rs a doubtful answer find;
      But in clear auguries unveil thy mind.’
      Scarce had I said: he shook the holy ground,
      The laurels, and the lofty hills around;
      And from the tripos rush’d a bellowing sound.
      Prostrate we fell; confess’d the present god,
      Who gave this answer from his dark abode:
      ‘Undaunted youths, go, seek that mother earth
      From which your ancestors derive their birth.
      The soil that sent you forth, her ancient race
      In her old bosom shall again embrace.
      Through the wide world th’ Aeneian house shall reign,
      And children’s children shall the crown sustain.’
      Thus Phoebus did our future fates disclose:
      A mighty tumult, mix’d with joy, arose.

      “All are concern’d to know what place the god
      Assign’d, and where determin’d our abode.
      My father, long revolving in his mind
      The race and lineage of the Trojan kind,
      Thus answer’d their demands: ‘Ye princes, hear
      Your pleasing fortune, and dispel your fear.
      The fruitful isle of Crete, well known to fame,
      Sacred of old to Jove’s imperial name,
      In the mid ocean lies, with large command,
      And on its plains a hundred cities stand.
      Another Ida rises there, and we
      From thence derive our Trojan ancestry.
      From thence, as ’tis divulg’d by certain fame,
      To the Rhoetean shores old Teucrus came;
      There fix’d, and there the seat of empire chose,
      Ere Ilium and the Trojan tow’rs arose.
      In humble vales they built their soft abodes,
      Till Cybele, the mother of the gods,
      With tinkling cymbals charm’d th’ Idaean woods,
      She secret rites and ceremonies taught,
      And to the yoke the savage lions brought.
      Let us the land which Heav’n appoints, explore;
      Appease the winds, and seek the Gnossian shore.
      If Jove assists the passage of our fleet,
      The third propitious dawn discovers Crete.’
      Thus having said, the sacrifices, laid
      On smoking altars, to the gods he paid:
      A bull, to Neptune an oblation due,
      Another bull to bright Apollo slew;
      A milk-white ewe, the western winds to please,
      And one coal-black, to calm the stormy seas.
      Ere this, a flying rumour had been spread
      That fierce Idomeneus from Crete was fled,
      Expell’d and exil’d; that the coast was free
      From foreign or domestic enemy.

      “We leave the Delian ports, and put to sea.
      By Naxos, fam’d for vintage, make our way;
      Then green Donysa pass; and sail in sight
      Of Paros’ isle, with marble quarries white.
      We pass the scatter’d isles of Cyclades,
      That, scarce distinguish’d, seem to stud the seas.
      The shouts of sailors double near the shores;
      They stretch their canvas, and they ply their oars.
      ‘All hands aloft! for Crete! for Crete!’ they cry,
      And swiftly thro’ the foamy billows fly.
      Full on the promis’d land at length we bore,
      With joy descending on the Cretan shore.
      With eager haste a rising town I frame,
      Which from the Trojan Pergamus I name:
      The name itself was grateful; I exhort
      To found their houses, and erect a fort.
      Our ships are haul’d upon the yellow strand;
      The youth begin to till the labour’d land;
      And I myself new marriages promote,
      Give laws, and dwellings I divide by lot;
      When rising vapours choke the wholesome air,
      And blasts of noisome winds corrupt the year;
      The trees devouring caterpillars burn;
      Parch’d was the grass, and blighted was the corn:
      Nor ’scape the beasts; for Sirius, from on high,
      With pestilential heat infects the sky:
      My men, some fall, the rest in fevers fry.
      Again my father bids me seek the shore
      Of sacred Delos, and the god implore,
      To learn what end of woes we might expect,
      And to what clime our weary course direct.

      “’Twas night, when ev’ry creature, void of cares,
      The common gift of balmy slumber shares:
      The statues of my gods (for such they seem’d),
      Those gods whom I from flaming Troy redeem’d,
      Before me stood, majestically bright,
      Full in the beams of Phoebe’s ent’ring light.
      Then thus they spoke, and eas’d my troubled mind:
      ‘What from the Delian god thou go’st to find,
      He tells thee here, and sends us to relate.
      Those pow’rs are we, companions of thy fate,
      Who from the burning town by thee were brought,
      Thy fortune follow’d, and thy safety wrought.
      Thro’ seas and lands as we thy steps attend,
      So shall our care thy glorious race befriend.
      An ample realm for thee thy fates ordain,
      A town that o’er the conquer’d world shall reign.
      Thou, mighty walls for mighty nations build;
      Nor let thy weary mind to labours yield:
      But change thy seat; for not the Delian god,
      Nor we, have giv’n thee Crete for our abode.
      A land there is, Hesperia call’d of old,
      The soil is fruitful, and the natives bold.
      Th’ Oenotrians held it once, by later fame
      Now call’d Italia, from the leader’s name.
      Jasius there and Dardanus were born;
      From thence we came, and thither must return.
      Rise, and thy sire with these glad tidings greet.
      Search Italy; for Jove denies thee Crete.’

      “Astonish’d at their voices and their sight,
      (Nor were they dreams, but visions of the night;
      I saw, I knew their faces, and descried,
      In perfect view, their hair with fillets tied;)
      I started from my couch; a clammy sweat
      On all my limbs and shiv’ring body sate.
      To heav’n I lift my hands with pious haste,
      And sacred incense in the flames I cast.
      Thus to the gods their perfect honours done,
      More cheerful, to my good old sire I run,
      And tell the pleasing news. In little space
      He found his error of the double race;
      Not, as before he deem’d, deriv’d from Crete;
      No more deluded by the doubtful seat:
      Then said: ‘O son, turmoil’d in Trojan fate!
      Such things as these Cassandra did relate.
      This day revives within my mind what she
      Foretold of Troy renew’d in Italy,
      And Latian lands; but who could then have thought
      That Phrygian gods to Latium should be brought,
      Or who believ’d what mad Cassandra taught?
      Now let us go where Phoebus leads the way.’

      “He said; and we with glad consent obey,
      Forsake the seat, and, leaving few behind,
      We spread our sails before the willing wind.
      Now from the sight of land our galleys move,
      With only seas around and skies above;
      When o’er our heads descends a burst of rain,
      And night with sable clouds involves the main;
      The ruffling winds the foamy billows raise;
      The scatter’d fleet is forc’d to sev’ral ways;
      The face of heav’n is ravish’d from our eyes,
      And in redoubled peals the roaring thunder flies.
      Cast from our course, we wander in the dark.
      No stars to guide, no point of land to mark.
      Ev’n Palinurus no distinction found
      Betwixt the night and day; such darkness reign’d around.
      Three starless nights the doubtful navy strays,
      Without distinction, and three sunless days;
      The fourth renews the light, and, from our shrouds,
      We view a rising land, like distant clouds;
      The mountain-tops confirm the pleasing sight,
      And curling smoke ascending from their height.
      The canvas falls; their oars the sailors ply;
      From the rude strokes the whirling waters fly.
      At length I land upon the Strophades,
      Safe from the danger of the stormy seas.
      Those isles are compass’d by th’ Ionian main,
      The dire abode where the foul Harpies reign,
      Forc’d by the winged warriors to repair
      To their old homes, and leave their costly fare.
      Monsters more fierce offended Heav’n ne’er sent
      From hell’s abyss, for human punishment:
      With virgin faces, but with wombs obscene,
      Foul paunches, and with ordure still unclean;
      With claws for hands, and looks for ever lean.

      “We landed at the port, and soon beheld
      Fat herds of oxen graze the flow’ry field,
      And wanton goats without a keeper stray’d.
      With weapons we the welcome prey invade,
      Then call the gods for partners of our feast,
      And Jove himself, the chief invited guest.
      We spread the tables on the greensward ground;
      We feed with hunger, and the bowls go round;
      When from the mountain-tops, with hideous cry,
      And clatt’ring wings, the hungry Harpies fly;
      They snatch the meat, defiling all they find,
      And, parting, leave a loathsome stench behind.
      Close by a hollow rock, again we sit,
      New dress the dinner, and the beds refit,
      Secure from sight, beneath a pleasing shade,
      Where tufted trees a native arbour made.
      Again the holy fires on altars burn;
      And once again the rav’nous birds return,
      Or from the dark recesses where they lie,
      Or from another quarter of the sky;
      With filthy claws their odious meal repeat,
      And mix their loathsome ordures with their meat.
      I bid my friends for vengeance then prepare,
      And with the hellish nation wage the war.
      They, as commanded, for the fight provide,
      And in the grass their glitt’ring weapons hide;
      Then, when along the crooked shore we hear
      Their clatt’ring wings, and saw the foes appear,
      Misenus sounds a charge: we take th’ alarm,
      And our strong hands with swords and bucklers arm.
      In this new kind of combat all employ
      Their utmost force, the monsters to destroy.
      In vain, the fated skin is proof to wounds;
      And from their plumes the shining sword rebounds.
      At length rebuff’d, they leave their mangled prey,
      And their stretch’d pinions to the skies display.
      Yet one remain’d, the messenger of Fate:
      High on a craggy cliff Celaeno sate,
      And thus her dismal errand did relate:
      ‘What! not contented with our oxen slain,
      Dare you with Heav’n an impious war maintain,
      And drive the Harpies from their native reign?
      Heed therefore what I say; and keep in mind
      What Jove decrees, what Phoebus has design’d,
      And I, the Furies’ queen, from both relate:
      You seek th’ Italian shores, foredoom’d by fate:
      Th’ Italian shores are granted you to find,
      And a safe passage to the port assign’d.
      But know, that ere your promis’d walls you build,
      My curses shall severely be fulfill’d.
      Fierce famine is your lot for this misdeed,
      Reduc’d to grind the plates on which you feed.’
      She said, and to the neighb’ring forest flew.
      Our courage fails us, and our fears renew.
      Hopeless to win by war, to pray’rs we fall,
      And on th’ offended Harpies humbly call,
      And whether gods or birds obscene they were,
      Our vows for pardon and for peace prefer.
      But old Anchises, off’ring sacrifice,
      And lifting up to heav’n his hands and eyes,
      Ador’d the greater gods: ‘Avert,’ said he,
      ‘These omens; render vain this prophecy,
      And from th’ impending curse a pious people free!’

      “Thus having said, he bids us put to sea;
      We loose from shore our haulsers, and obey,
      And soon with swelling sails pursue the wat’ry way.
      Amidst our course, Zacynthian woods appear;
      And next by rocky Neritos we steer:
      We fly from Ithaca’s detested shore,
      And curse the land which dire Ulysses bore.
      At length Leucate’s cloudy top appears,
      And the Sun’s temple, which the sailor fears.
      Resolv’d to breathe a while from labour past,
      Our crooked anchors from the prow we cast,
      And joyful to the little city haste.
      Here, safe beyond our hopes, our vows we pay
      To Jove, the guide and patron of our way.
      The customs of our country we pursue,
      And Trojan games on Actian shores renew.
      Our youth their naked limbs besmear with oil,
      And exercise the wrastlers’ noble toil;
      Pleas’d to have sail’d so long before the wind,
      And left so many Grecian towns behind.
      The sun had now fulfill’d his annual course,
      And Boreas on the seas display’d his force:
      I fix’d upon the temple’s lofty door
      The brazen shield which vanquish’d Abas bore;
      The verse beneath my name and action speaks:
      ‘These arms Aeneas took from conqu’ring Greeks.’
      Then I command to weigh; the seamen ply
      Their sweeping oars; the smoking billows fly.
      The sight of high Phaeacia soon we lost,
      And skimm’d along Epirus’ rocky coast.

      “Then to Chaonia’s port our course we bend,
      And, landed, to Buthrotus’ heights ascend.
      Here wondrous things were loudly blaz’d fame:
      How Helenus reviv’d the Trojan name,
      And reign’d in Greece; that Priam’s captive son
      Succeeded Pyrrhus in his bed and throne;
      And fair Andromache, restor’d by fate,
      Once more was happy in a Trojan mate.
      I leave my galleys riding in the port,
      And long to see the new Dardanian court.
      By chance, the mournful queen, before the gate,
      Then solemniz’d her former husband’s fate.
      Green altars, rais’d of turf, with gifts she crown’d,
      And sacred priests in order stand around,
      And thrice the name of hapless Hector sound.
      The grove itself resembles Ida’s wood;
      And Simois seem’d the well-dissembled flood.
      But when at nearer distance she beheld
      My shining armour and my Trojan shield,
      Astonish’d at the sight, the vital heat
      Forsakes her limbs; her veins no longer beat:
      She faints, she falls, and scarce recov’ring strength,
      Thus, with a falt’ring tongue, she speaks at length:

      “‘Are you alive, O goddess-born?’ she said,
      ‘Or if a ghost, then where is Hector’s shade?’
      At this, she cast a loud and frightful cry.
      With broken words I made this brief reply:
      ‘All of me that remains appears in sight;
      I live, if living be to loathe the light.
      No phantom; but I drag a wretched life,
      My fate resembling that of Hector’s wife.
      What have you suffer’d since you lost your lord?
      By what strange blessing are you now restor’d?
      Still are you Hector’s? or is Hector fled,
      And his remembrance lost in Pyrrhus’ bed?’
      With eyes dejected, in a lowly tone,
      After a modest pause she thus begun:

      “‘O only happy maid of Priam’s race,
      Whom death deliver’d from the foes’ embrace!
      Commanded on Achilles’ tomb to die,
      Not forc’d, like us, to hard captivity,
      Or in a haughty master’s arms to lie.
      In Grecian ships unhappy we were borne,
      Endur’d the victor’s lust, sustain’d the scorn:
      Thus I submitted to the lawless pride
      Of Pyrrhus, more a handmaid than a bride.
      Cloy’d with possession, he forsook my bed,
      And Helen’s lovely daughter sought to wed;
      Then me to Trojan Helenus resign’d,
      And his two slaves in equal marriage join’d;
      Till young Orestes, pierc’d with deep despair,
      And longing to redeem the promis’d fair,
      Before Apollo’s altar slew the ravisher.
      By Pyrrhus’ death the kingdom we regain’d:
      At least one half with Helenus remain’d.
      Our part, from Chaon, he Chaonia calls,
      And names from Pergamus his rising walls.
      But you, what fates have landed on our coast?
      What gods have sent you, or what storms have toss’d?
      Does young Ascanius life and health enjoy,
      Sav’d from the ruins of unhappy Troy?
      O tell me how his mother’s loss he bears,
      What hopes are promis’d from his blooming years,
      How much of Hector in his face appears?’
      She spoke; and mix’d her speech with mournful cries,
      And fruitless tears came trickling from her eyes.

      “At length her lord descends upon the plain,
      In pomp, attended with a num’rous train;
      Receives his friends, and to the city leads,
      And tears of joy amidst his welcome sheds.
      Proceeding on, another Troy I see,
      Or, in less compass, Troy’s epitome.
      A riv’let by the name of Xanthus ran,
      And I embrace the Scaean gate again.
      My friends in porticoes were entertain’d,
      And feasts and pleasures thro’ the city reign’d.
      The tables fill’d the spacious hall around,
      And golden bowls with sparkling wine were crown’d.
      Two days we pass’d in mirth, till friendly gales,
      Blown from the south supplied our swelling sails.
      Then to the royal seer I thus began:
      ‘O thou, who know’st, beyond the reach of man,
      The laws of heav’n, and what the stars decree;
      Whom Phoebus taught unerring prophecy,
      From his own tripod, and his holy tree;
      Skill’d in the wing’d inhabitants of air,
      What auspices their notes and flights declare:
      O say; for all religious rites portend
      A happy voyage, and a prosp’rous end;
      And ev’ry power and omen of the sky
      Direct my course for destin’d Italy;
      But only dire Celaeno, from the gods,
      A dismal famine fatally forebodes:
      O say what dangers I am first to shun,
      What toils vanquish, and what course to run.’

      “The prophet first with sacrifice adores
      The greater gods; their pardon then implores;
      Unbinds the fillet from his holy head;
      To Phoebus, next, my trembling steps he led,
      Full of religious doubts and awful dread.
      Then, with his god possess’d, before the shrine,
      These words proceeded from his mouth divine:
      ‘O goddess-born, (for Heav’n’s appointed will,
      With greater auspices of good than ill,
      Foreshows thy voyage, and thy course directs;
      Thy fates conspire, and Jove himself protects,)
      Of many things some few I shall explain,
      Teach thee to shun the dangers of the main,
      And how at length the promis’d shore to gain.
      The rest the fates from Helenus conceal,
      And Juno’s angry pow’r forbids to tell.
      First, then, that happy shore, that seems so nigh,
      Will far from your deluded wishes fly;
      Long tracts of seas divide your hopes from Italy:
      For you must cruise along Sicilian shores,
      And stem the currents with your struggling oars;
      Then round th’ Italian coast your navy steer;
      And, after this, to Circe’s island veer;
      And, last, before your new foundations rise,
      Must pass the Stygian lake, and view the nether skies.
      Now mark the signs of future ease and rest,
      And bear them safely treasur’d in thy breast.
      When, in the shady shelter of a wood,
      And near the margin of a gentle flood,
      Thou shalt behold a sow upon the ground,
      With thirty sucking young encompass’d round;
      The dam and offspring white as falling snow:
      These on thy city shall their name bestow,
      And there shall end thy labours and thy woe.
      Nor let the threaten’d famine fright thy mind,
      For Phoebus will assist, and Fate the way will find.
      Let not thy course to that ill coast be bent,
      Which fronts from far th’ Epirian continent:
      Those parts are all by Grecian foes possess’d;
      The salvage Locrians here the shores infest;
      There fierce Idomeneus his city builds,
      And guards with arms the Salentinian fields;
      And on the mountain’s brow Petilia stands,
      Which Philoctetes with his troops commands.
      Ev’n when thy fleet is landed on the shore,
      And priests with holy vows the gods adore,
      Then with a purple veil involve your eyes,
      Lest hostile faces blast the sacrifice.
      These rites and customs to the rest commend,
      That to your pious race they may descend.

      ‘When, parted hence, the wind, that ready waits
      For Sicily, shall bear you to the straits
      Where proud Pelorus opes a wider way,
      Tack to the larboard, and stand off to sea:
      Veer starboard sea and land. Th’ Italian shore
      And fair Sicilia’s coast were one, before
      An earthquake caus’d the flaw: the roaring tides
      The passage broke that land from land divides;
      And where the lands retir’d, the rushing ocean rides.
      Distinguish’d by the straits, on either hand,
      Now rising cities in long order stand,
      And fruitful fields: so much can time invade
      The mould’ring work that beauteous Nature made.
      Far on the right, her dogs foul Scylla hides:
      Charybdis roaring on the left presides,
      And in her greedy whirlpool sucks the tides;
      Then spouts them from below: with fury driv’n,
      The waves mount up and wash the face of heav’n.
      But Scylla from her den, with open jaws,
      The sinking vessel in her eddy draws,
      Then dashes on the rocks. A human face,
      And virgin bosom, hides her tail’s disgrace:
      Her parts obscene below the waves descend,
      With dogs inclos’d, and in a dolphin end.
      ’Tis safer, then, to bear aloof to sea,
      And coast Pachynus, tho’ with more delay,
      Than once to view misshapen Scylla near,
      And the loud yell of wat’ry wolves to hear.

      “‘Besides, if faith to Helenus be due,
      And if prophetic Phoebus tell me true,
      Do not this precept of your friend forget,
      Which therefore more than once I must repeat:
      Above the rest, great Juno’s name adore;
      Pay vows to Juno; Juno’s aid implore.
      Let gifts be to the mighty queen design’d,
      And mollify with pray’rs her haughty mind.
      Thus, at the length, your passage shall be free,
      And you shall safe descend on Italy.
      Arriv’d at Cumae, when you view the flood
      Of black Avernus, and the sounding wood,
      The mad prophetic Sibyl you shall find,
      Dark in a cave, and on a rock reclin’d.
      She sings the fates, and, in her frantic fits,
      The notes and names, inscrib’d, to leafs commits.
      What she commits to leafs, in order laid,
      Before the cavern’s entrance are display’d:
      Unmov’d they lie; but, if a blast of wind
      Without, or vapours issue from behind,
      The leafs are borne aloft in liquid air,
      And she resumes no more her museful care,
      Nor gathers from the rocks her scatter’d verse,
      Nor sets in order what the winds disperse.
      Thus, many not succeeding, most upbraid
      The madness of the visionary maid,
      And with loud curses leave the mystic shade.

      “‘Think it not loss of time a while to stay,
      Tho’ thy companions chide thy long delay;
      Tho’ summon’d to the seas, tho’ pleasing gales
      Invite thy course, and stretch thy swelling sails:
      But beg the sacred priestess to relate
      With willing words, and not to write thy fate.
      The fierce Italian people she will show,
      And all thy wars, and all thy future woe,
      And what thou may’st avoid, and what must undergo.
      She shall direct thy course, instruct thy mind,
      And teach thee how the happy shores to find.
      This is what Heav’n allows me to relate:
      Now part in peace; pursue thy better fate,
      And raise, by strength of arms, the Trojan state.’

      “This when the priest with friendly voice declar’d,
      He gave me license, and rich gifts prepar’d:
      Bounteous of treasure, he supplied my want
      With heavy gold, and polish’d elephant;
      Then Dodonaean caldrons put on board,
      And ev’ry ship with sums of silver stor’d.
      A trusty coat of mail to me he sent,
      Thrice chain’d with gold, for use and ornament;
      The helm of Pyrrhus added to the rest,
      That flourish’d with a plume and waving crest.
      Nor was my sire forgotten, nor my friends;
      And large recruits he to my navy sends:
      Men, horses, captains, arms, and warlike stores;
      Supplies new pilots, and new sweeping oars.
      Meantime, my sire commands to hoist our sails,
      Lest we should lose the first auspicious gales.

      “The prophet bless’d the parting crew, and last,
      With words like these, his ancient friend embrac’d:
      ‘Old happy man, the care of gods above,
      Whom heav’nly Venus honour’d with her love,
      And twice preserv’d thy life, when Troy was lost,
      Behold from far the wish’d Ausonian coast:
      There land; but take a larger compass round,
      For that before is all forbidden ground.
      The shore that Phoebus has design’d for you,
      At farther distance lies, conceal’d from view.
      Go happy hence, and seek your new abodes,
      Blest in a son, and favour’d by the gods:
      For I with useless words prolong your stay,
      When southern gales have summon’d you away.’

      “Nor less the queen our parting thence deplor’d,
      Nor was less bounteous than her Trojan lord.
      A noble present to my son she brought,
      A robe with flow’rs on golden tissue wrought,
      A phrygian vest; and loads with gifts beside
      Of precious texture, and of Asian pride.
      ‘Accept,’ she said, ‘these monuments of love,
      Which in my youth with happier hands I wove:
      Regard these trifles for the giver’s sake;
      ’Tis the last present Hector’s wife can make.
      Thou call’st my lost Astyanax to mind;
      In thee his features and his form I find:
      His eyes so sparkled with a lively flame;
      Such were his motions; such was all his frame;
      And ah! had Heav’n so pleas’d, his years had been the same.’

      “With tears I took my last adieu, and said:
      ‘Your fortune, happy pair, already made,
      Leaves you no farther wish. My diff’rent state,
      Avoiding one, incurs another fate.
      To you a quiet seat the gods allow:
      You have no shores to search, no seas to plow,
      Nor fields of flying Italy to chase:
      (Deluding visions, and a vain embrace!)
      You see another Simois, and enjoy
      The labour of your hands, another Troy,
      With better auspice than her ancient tow’rs,
      And less obnoxious to the Grecian pow’rs.
      If e’er the gods, whom I with vows adore,
      Conduct my steps to Tiber’s happy shore;
      If ever I ascend the Latian throne,
      And build a city I may call my own;
      As both of us our birth from Troy derive,
      So let our kindred lines in concord live,
      And both in acts of equal friendship strive.
      Our fortunes, good or bad, shall be the same:
      The double Troy shall differ but in name;
      That what we now begin may never end,
      But long to late posterity descend.’

      “Near the Ceraunian rocks our course we bore;
      The shortest passage to th’ Italian shore.
      Now had the sun withdrawn his radiant light,
      And hills were hid in dusky shades of night:
      We land, and, on the bosom of the ground,
      A safe retreat and a bare lodging found.
      Close by the shore we lay; the sailors keep
      Their watches, and the rest securely sleep.
      The night, proceeding on with silent pace,
      Stood in her noon, and view’d with equal face
      Her steepy rise and her declining race.
      Then wakeful Palinurus rose, to spy
      The face of heav’n, and the nocturnal sky;
      And listen’d ev’ry breath of air to try;
      Observes the stars, and notes their sliding course,
      The Pleiads, Hyads, and their wat’ry force;
      And both the Bears is careful to behold,
      And bright Orion, arm’d with burnish’d gold.
      Then, when he saw no threat’ning tempest nigh,
      But a sure promise of a settled sky,
      He gave the sign to weigh; we break our sleep,
      Forsake the pleasing shore, and plow the deep.

      “And now the rising morn with rosy light
      Adorns the skies, and puts the stars to flight;
      When we from far, like bluish mists, descry
      The hills, and then the plains, of Italy.
      Achates first pronounc’d the joyful sound;
      Then, ‘Italy!’ the cheerful crew rebound.
      My sire Anchises crown’d a cup with wine,
      And, off’ring, thus implor’d the pow’rs divine:
      ‘Ye gods, presiding over lands and seas,
      And you who raging winds and waves appease,
      Breathe on our swelling sails a prosp’rous wind,
      And smooth our passage to the port assign’d!’
      The gentle gales their flagging force renew,
      And now the happy harbour is in view.
      Minerva’s temple then salutes our sight,
      Plac’d, as a landmark, on the mountain’s height.
      We furl our sails, and turn the prows to shore;
      The curling waters round the galleys roar.
      The land lies open to the raging east,
      Then, bending like a bow, with rocks compress’d,
      Shuts out the storms; the winds and waves complain,
      And vent their malice on the cliffs in vain.
      The port lies hid within; on either side
      Two tow’ring rocks the narrow mouth divide.
      The temple, which aloft we view’d before,
      To distance flies, and seems to shun the shore.
      Scarce landed, the first omens I beheld
      Were four white steeds that cropp’d the flow’ry field.
      ‘War, war is threaten’d from this foreign ground,’
      My father cried, ‘where warlike steeds are found.
      Yet, since reclaim’d to chariots they submit,
      And bend to stubborn yokes, and champ the bit,
      Peace may succeed to war.’ Our way we bend
      To Pallas, and the sacred hill ascend;
      There prostrate to the fierce Virago pray,
      Whose temple was the landmark of our way.
      Each with a Phrygian mantle veil’d his head,
      And all commands of Helenus obey’d,
      And pious rites to Grecian Juno paid.
      These dues perform’d, we stretch our sails, and stand
      To sea, forsaking that suspected land.

      “From hence Tarentum’s bay appears in view,
      For Hercules renown’d, if fame be true.
      Just opposite, Lacinian Juno stands;
      Caulonian tow’rs, and Scylacaean strands,
      For shipwrecks fear’d. Mount Aetna thence we spy,
      Known by the smoky flames which cloud the sky.
      Far off we hear the waves with surly sound
      Invade the rocks, the rocks their groans rebound.
      The billows break upon the sounding strand,
      And roll the rising tide, impure with sand.
      Then thus Anchises, in experience old:
      ‘’Tis that Charybdis which the seer foretold,
      And those the promis’d rocks! Bear off to sea!’
      With haste the frighted mariners obey.
      First Palinurus to the larboard veer’d;
      Then all the fleet by his example steer’d.
      To heav’n aloft on ridgy waves we ride,
      Then down to hell descend, when they divide;
      And thrice our galleys knock’d the stony ground,
      And thrice the hollow rocks return’d the sound,
      And thrice we saw the stars, that stood with dews around.
      The flagging winds forsook us, with the sun;
      And, wearied, on Cyclopian shores we run.
      The port capacious, and secure from wind,
      Is to the foot of thund’ring Aetna join’d.
      By turns a pitchy cloud she rolls on high;
      By turns hot embers from her entrails fly,
      And flakes of mounting flames, that lick the sky.
      Oft from her bowels massy rocks are thrown,
      And, shiver’d by the force, come piecemeal down.
      Oft liquid lakes of burning sulphur flow,
      Fed from the fiery springs that boil below.
      Enceladus, they say, transfix’d by Jove,
      With blasted limbs came tumbling from above;
      And, where he fell, th’ avenging father drew
      This flaming hill, and on his body threw.
      As often as he turns his weary sides,
      He shakes the solid isle, and smoke the heavens hides.
      In shady woods we pass the tedious night,
      Where bellowing sounds and groans our souls affright,
      Of which no cause is offer’d to the sight;
      For not one star was kindled in the sky,
      Nor could the moon her borrow’d light supply;
      For misty clouds involv’d the firmament,
      The stars were muffled, and the moon was pent.

      “Scarce had the rising sun the day reveal’d,
      Scarce had his heat the pearly dews dispell’d,
      When from the woods there bolts, before our sight,
      Somewhat betwixt a mortal and a sprite,
      So thin, so ghastly meager, and so wan,
      So bare of flesh, he scarce resembled man.
      This thing, all tatter’d, seem’d from far t’implore
      Our pious aid, and pointed to the shore.
      We look behind, then view his shaggy beard;
      His clothes were tagg’d with thorns, and filth his limbs
      besmear’d;
      The rest, in mien, in habit, and in face,
      Appear’d a Greek, and such indeed he was.
      He cast on us, from far, a frightful view,
      Whom soon for Trojans and for foes he knew;
      Stood still, and paus’d; then all at once began
      To stretch his limbs, and trembled as he ran.
      Soon as approach’d, upon his knees he falls,
      And thus with tears and sighs for pity calls:
      ‘Now, by the pow’rs above, and what we share
      From Nature’s common gift, this vital air,
      O Trojans, take me hence! I beg no more;
      But bear me far from this unhappy shore.
      ’Tis true, I am a Greek, and farther own,
      Among your foes besieg’d th’ imperial town.
      For such demerits if my death be due,
      No more for this abandon’d life I sue;
      This only favour let my tears obtain,
      To throw me headlong in the rapid main:
      Since nothing more than death my crime demands,
      I die content, to die by human hands.’
      He said, and on his knees my knees embrac’d:
      I bade him boldly tell his fortune past,
      His present state, his lineage, and his name,
      Th’ occasion of his fears, and whence he came.
      The good Anchises rais’d him with his hand;
      Who, thus encourag’d, answer’d our demand:
      ‘From Ithaca, my native soil, I came
      To Troy; and Achaemenides my name.
      Me my poor father with Ulysses sent;
      (O had I stay’d, with poverty content!)
      But, fearful for themselves, my countrymen
      Left me forsaken in the Cyclops’ den.
      The cave, tho’ large, was dark; the dismal floor
      Was pav’d with mangled limbs and putrid gore.
      Our monstrous host, of more than human size,
      Erects his head, and stares within the skies;
      Bellowing his voice, and horrid is his hue.
      Ye gods, remove this plague from mortal view!
      The joints of slaughter’d wretches are his food;
      And for his wine he quaffs the streaming blood.
      These eyes beheld, when with his spacious hand
      He seiz’d two captives of our Grecian band;
      Stretch’d on his back, he dash’d against the stones
      Their broken bodies, and their crackling bones:
      With spouting blood the purple pavement swims,
      While the dire glutton grinds the trembling limbs.

      “‘Not unreveng’d Ulysses bore their fate,
      Nor thoughtless of his own unhappy state;
      For, gorg’d with flesh, and drunk with human wine
      While fast asleep the giant lay supine,
      Snoring aloud, and belching from his maw
      His indigested foam, and morsels raw;
      We pray; we cast the lots, and then surround
      The monstrous body, stretch’d along the ground:
      Each, as he could approach him, lends a hand
      To bore his eyeball with a flaming brand.
      Beneath his frowning forehead lay his eye;
      For only one did the vast frame supply;
      But that a globe so large, his front it fill’d,
      Like the sun’s disk or like a Grecian shield.
      The stroke succeeds; and down the pupil bends:
      This vengeance follow’d for our slaughter’d friends.
      But haste, unhappy wretches, haste to fly!
      Your cables cut, and on your oars rely!
      Such, and so vast as Polypheme appears,
      A hundred more this hated island bears:
      Like him, in caves they shut their woolly sheep;
      Like him, their herds on tops of mountains keep;
      Like him, with mighty strides, they stalk from steep to steep
      And now three moons their sharpen’d horns renew,
      Since thus, in woods and wilds, obscure from view,
      I drag my loathsome days with mortal fright,
      And in deserted caverns lodge by night;
      Oft from the rocks a dreadful prospect see
      Of the huge Cyclops, like a walking tree:
      From far I hear his thund’ring voice resound,
      And trampling feet that shake the solid ground.
      Cornels and salvage berries of the wood,
      And roots and herbs, have been my meager food.
      While all around my longing eyes I cast,
      I saw your happy ships appear at last.
      On those I fix’d my hopes, to these I run;
      ’Tis all I ask, this cruel race to shun;
      What other death you please, yourselves bestow.’

      “Scarce had he said, when on the mountain’s brow
      We saw the giant shepherd stalk before
      His following flock, and leading to the shore:
      A monstrous bulk, deform’d, depriv’d of sight;
      His staff a trunk of pine, to guide his steps aright.
      His pond’rous whistle from his neck descends;
      His woolly care their pensive lord attends:
      This only solace his hard fortune sends.
      Soon as he reach’d the shore and touch’d the waves,
      From his bor’d eye the gutt’ring blood he laves:
      He gnash’d his teeth, and groan’d; thro’ seas he strides,
      And scarce the topmost billows touch’d his sides.

      “Seiz’d with a sudden fear, we run to sea,
      The cables cut, and silent haste away;
      The well-deserving stranger entertain;
      Then, buckling to the work, our oars divide the main.
      The giant harken’d to the dashing sound:
      But, when our vessels out of reach he found,
      He strided onward, and in vain essay’d
      Th’ Ionian deep, and durst no farther wade.
      With that he roar’d aloud: the dreadful cry
      Shakes earth, and air, and seas; the billows fly
      Before the bellowing noise to distant Italy.
      The neighb’ring Aetna trembling all around,
      The winding caverns echo to the sound.
      His brother Cyclops hear the yelling roar,
      And, rushing down the mountains, crowd the shore.
      We saw their stern distorted looks, from far,
      And one-eyed glance, that vainly threaten’d war:
      A dreadful council, with their heads on high;
      (The misty clouds about their foreheads fly;)
      Not yielding to the tow’ring tree of Jove,
      Or tallest cypress of Diana’s grove.
      New pangs of mortal fear our minds assail;
      We tug at ev’ry oar, and hoist up ev’ry sail,
      And take th’ advantage of the friendly gale.
      Forewarn’d by Helenus, we strive to shun
      Charybdis’ gulf, nor dare to Scylla run.
      An equal fate on either side appears:
      We, tacking to the left, are free from fears;
      For, from Pelorus’ point, the North arose,
      And drove us back where swift Pantagias flows.
      His rocky mouth we pass, and make our way
      By Thapsus and Megara’s winding bay.
      This passage Achaemenides had shown,
      Tracing the course which he before had run.

      “Right o’er against Plemmyrium’s wat’ry strand,
      There lies an isle once call’d th’ Ortygian land.
      Alpheus, as old fame reports, has found
      From Greece a secret passage under ground,
      By love to beauteous Arethusa led;
      And, mingling here, they roll in the same sacred bed.
      As Helenus enjoin’d, we next adore
      Diana’s name, protectress of the shore.
      With prosp’rous gales we pass the quiet sounds
      Of still Elorus, and his fruitful bounds.
      Then, doubling Cape Pachynus, we survey
      The rocky shore extended to the sea.
      The town of Camarine from far we see,
      And fenny lake, undrain’d by fate’s decree.
      In sight of the Geloan fields we pass,
      And the large walls, where mighty Gela was;
      Then Agragas, with lofty summits crown’d,
      Long for the race of warlike steeds renown’d.
      We pass’d Selinus, and the palmy land,
      And widely shun the Lilybaean strand,
      Unsafe, for secret rocks and moving sand.
      At length on shore the weary fleet arriv’d,
      Which Drepanum’s unhappy port receiv’d.
      Here, after endless labours, often toss’d
      By raging storms, and driv’n on ev’ry coast,
      My dear, dear father, spent with age, I lost:
      Ease of my cares, and solace of my pain,
      Sav’d thro’ a thousand toils, but sav’d in vain
      The prophet, who my future woes reveal’d,
      Yet this, the greatest and the worst, conceal’d;
      And dire Celaeno, whose foreboding skill
      Denounc’d all else, was silent of the ill.
      This my last labour was. Some friendly god
      From thence convey’d us to your blest abode.”

      Thus, to the list’ning queen, the royal guest
      His wand’ring course and all his toils express’d;
      And here concluding, he retir’d to rest.



 

      But anxious cares already seiz’d the queen:
      She fed within her veins a flame unseen;
      The hero’s valour, acts, and birth inspire
      Her soul with love, and fan the secret fire.
      His words, his looks, imprinted in her heart,
      Improve the passion, and increase the smart.
      Now, when the purple morn had chas’d away
      The dewy shadows, and restor’d the day,
      Her sister first with early care she sought,
      And thus in mournful accents eas’d her thought:

      “My dearest Anna, what new dreams affright
      My lab’ring soul! what visions of the night
      Disturb my quiet, and distract my breast
      With strange ideas of our Trojan guest!
      His worth, his actions, and majestic air,
      A man descended from the gods declare.
      Fear ever argues a degenerate kind;
      His birth is well asserted by his mind.
      Then, what he suffer’d, when by Fate betray’d!
      What brave attempts for falling Troy he made!
      Such were his looks, so gracefully he spoke,
      That, were I not resolv’d against the yoke
      Of hapless marriage, never to be curst
      With second love, so fatal was my first,
      To this one error I might yield again;
      For, since Sichaeus was untimely slain,
      This only man is able to subvert
      The fix’d foundations of my stubborn heart.
      And, to confess my frailty, to my shame,
      Somewhat I find within, if not the same,
      Too like the sparkles of my former flame.
      But first let yawning earth a passage rend,
      And let me thro’ the dark abyss descend;
      First let avenging Jove, with flames from high,
      Drive down this body to the nether sky,
      Condemn’d with ghosts in endless night to lie,
      Before I break the plighted faith I gave!
      No! he who had my vows shall ever have;
      For, whom I lov’d on earth, I worship in the grave.”

      She said: the tears ran gushing from her eyes,
      And stopp’d her speech. Her sister thus replies:
      “O dearer than the vital air I breathe,
      Will you to grief your blooming years bequeath,
      Condemn’d to waste in woes your lonely life,
      Without the joys of mother or of wife?
      Think you these tears, this pompous train of woe,
      Are known or valued by the ghosts below?
      I grant that, while your sorrows yet were green,
      It well became a woman, and a queen,
      The vows of Tyrian princes to neglect,
      To scorn Hyarbas, and his love reject,
      With all the Libyan lords of mighty name;
      But will you fight against a pleasing flame!
      This little spot of land, which Heav’n bestows,
      On ev’ry side is hemm’d with warlike foes;
      Gaetulian cities here are spread around,
      And fierce Numidians there your frontiers bound;
      Here lies a barren waste of thirsty land,
      And there the Syrtes raise the moving sand;
      Barcaean troops besiege the narrow shore,
      And from the sea Pygmalion threatens more.
      Propitious Heav’n, and gracious Juno, lead
      This wand’ring navy to your needful aid:
      How will your empire spread, your city rise,
      From such a union, and with such allies?
      Implore the favour of the pow’rs above,
      And leave the conduct of the rest to love.
      Continue still your hospitable way,
      And still invent occasions of their stay,
      Till storms and winter winds shall cease to threat,
      And planks and oars repair their shatter’d fleet.”

      These words, which from a friend and sister came,
      With ease resolv’d the scruples of her fame,
      And added fury to the kindled flame.
      Inspir’d with hope, the project they pursue;
      On ev’ry altar sacrifice renew:
      A chosen ewe of two years old they pay
      To Ceres, Bacchus, and the God of Day;
      Preferring Juno’s pow’r, for Juno ties
      The nuptial knot and makes the marriage joys.
      The beauteous queen before her altar stands,
      And holds the golden goblet in her hands.
      A milk-white heifer she with flow’rs adorns,
      And pours the ruddy wine betwixt her horns;
      And, while the priests with pray’r the gods invoke,
      She feeds their altars with Sabaean smoke,
      With hourly care the sacrifice renews,
      And anxiously the panting entrails views.
      What priestly rites, alas! what pious art,
      What vows avail to cure a bleeding heart!
      A gentle fire she feeds within her veins,
      Where the soft god secure in silence reigns.

      Sick with desire, and seeking him she loves,
      From street to street the raving Dido roves.
      So when the watchful shepherd, from the blind,
      Wounds with a random shaft the careless hind,
      Distracted with her pain she flies the woods,
      Bounds o’er the lawn, and seeks the silent floods,
      With fruitless care; for still the fatal dart
      Sticks in her side, and rankles in her heart.
      And now she leads the Trojan chief along
      The lofty walls, amidst the busy throng;
      Displays her Tyrian wealth, and rising town,
      Which love, without his labour, makes his own.
      This pomp she shows, to tempt her wand’ring guest;
      Her falt’ring tongue forbids to speak the rest.
      When day declines, and feasts renew the night,
      Still on his face she feeds her famish’d sight;
      She longs again to hear the prince relate
      His own adventures and the Trojan fate.
      He tells it o’er and o’er; but still in vain,
      For still she begs to hear it once again.
      The hearer on the speaker’s mouth depends,
      And thus the tragic story never ends.

      Then, when they part, when Phoebe’s paler light
      Withdraws, and falling stars to sleep invite,
      She last remains, when ev’ry guest is gone,
      Sits on the bed he press’d, and sighs alone;
      Absent, her absent hero sees and hears;
      Or in her bosom young Ascanius bears,
      And seeks the father’s image in the child,
      If love by likeness might be so beguil’d.

      Meantime the rising tow’rs are at a stand;
      No labours exercise the youthful band,
      Nor use of arts, nor toils of arms they know;
      The mole is left unfinish’d to the foe;
      The mounds, the works, the walls, neglected lie,
      Short of their promis’d heighth, that seem’d to threat the sky,

      But when imperial Juno, from above,
      Saw Dido fetter’d in the chains of love,
      Hot with the venom which her veins inflam’d,
      And by no sense of shame to be reclaim’d,
      With soothing words to Venus she begun:
      “High praises, endless honours, you have won,
      And mighty trophies, with your worthy son!
      Two gods a silly woman have undone!
      Nor am I ignorant, you both suspect
      This rising city, which my hands erect:
      But shall celestial discord never cease?
      ’Tis better ended in a lasting peace.
      You stand possess’d of all your soul desir’d:
      Poor Dido with consuming love is fir’d.
      Your Trojan with my Tyrian let us join;
      So Dido shall be yours, Aeneas mine:
      One common kingdom, one united line.
      Eliza shall a Dardan lord obey,
      And lofty Carthage for a dow’r convey.”
      Then Venus, who her hidden fraud descried,
      Which would the scepter of the world misguide
      To Libyan shores, thus artfully replied:
      “Who, but a fool, would wars with Juno choose,
      And such alliance and such gifts refuse,
      If Fortune with our joint desires comply?
      The doubt is all from Jove and destiny;
      Lest he forbid, with absolute command,
      To mix the people in one common land.
      Or will the Trojan and the Tyrian line
      In lasting leagues and sure succession join?
      But you, the partner of his bed and throne,
      May move his mind; my wishes are your own.”

      “Mine,” said imperial Juno, “be the care;
      Time urges, now, to perfect this affair:
      Attend my counsel, and the secret share.
      When next the Sun his rising light displays,
      And gilds the world below with purple rays,
      The queen, Aeneas, and the Tyrian court
      Shall to the shady woods, for sylvan game, resort.
      There, while the huntsmen pitch their toils around,
      And cheerful horns from side to side resound,
      A pitchy cloud shall cover all the plain
      With hail, and thunder, and tempestuous rain;
      The fearful train shall take their speedy flight,
      Dispers’d, and all involv’d in gloomy night;
      One cave a grateful shelter shall afford
      To the fair princess and the Trojan lord.
      I will myself the bridal bed prepare,
      If you, to bless the nuptials, will be there:
      So shall their loves be crown’d with due delights,
      And Hymen shall be present at the rites.”
      The Queen of Love consents, and closely smiles
      At her vain project, and discover’d wiles.

      The rosy morn was risen from the main,
      And horns and hounds awake the princely train:
      They issue early thro’ the city gate,
      Where the more wakeful huntsmen ready wait,
      With nets, and toils, and darts, beside the force
      Of Spartan dogs, and swift Massylian horse.
      The Tyrian peers and officers of state
      For the slow queen in antechambers wait;
      Her lofty courser, in the court below,
      Who his majestic rider seems to know,
      Proud of his purple trappings, paws the ground,
      And champs the golden bit, and spreads the foam around.
      The queen at length appears; on either hand
      The brawny guards in martial order stand.
      A flow’r’d simar with golden fringe she wore,
      And at her back a golden quiver bore;
      Her flowing hair a golden caul restrains,
      A golden clasp the Tyrian robe sustains.
      Then young Ascanius, with a sprightly grace,
      Leads on the Trojan youth to view the chase.
      But far above the rest in beauty shines
      The great Aeneas, the troop he joins;
      Like fair Apollo, when he leaves the frost
      Of wint’ry Xanthus, and the Lycian coast,
      When to his native Delos he resorts,
      Ordains the dances, and renews the sports;
      Where painted Scythians, mix’d with Cretan bands,
      Before the joyful altars join their hands:
      Himself, on Cynthus walking, sees below
      The merry madness of the sacred show.
      Green wreaths of bays his length of hair inclose;
      A golden fillet binds his awful brows;
      His quiver sounds: not less the prince is seen
      In manly presence, or in lofty mien.

      Now had they reach’d the hills, and storm’d the seat
      Of salvage beasts, in dens, their last retreat.
      The cry pursues the mountain goats: they bound
      From rock to rock, and keep the craggy ground;
      Quite otherwise the stags, a trembling train,
      In herds unsingled, scour the dusty plain,
      And a long chase in open view maintain.
      The glad Ascanius, as his courser guides,
      Spurs thro’ the vale, and these and those outrides.
      His horse’s flanks and sides are forc’d to feel
      The clanking lash, and goring of the steel.
      Impatiently he views the feeble prey,
      Wishing some nobler beast to cross his way,
      And rather would the tusky boar attend,
      Or see the tawny lion downward bend.

      Meantime, the gath’ring clouds obscure the skies:
      From pole to pole the forky lightning flies;
      The rattling thunders roll; and Juno pours
      A wintry deluge down, and sounding show’rs.
      The company, dispers’d, to converts ride,
      And seek the homely cots, or mountain’s hollow side.
      The rapid rains, descending from the hills,
      To rolling torrents raise the creeping rills.
      The queen and prince, as love or fortune guides,
      One common cavern in her bosom hides.
      Then first the trembling earth the signal gave,
      And flashing fires enlighten all the cave;
      Hell from below, and Juno from above,
      And howling nymphs, were conscious of their love.
      From this ill-omen’d hour in time arose
      Debate and death, and all succeeding woes.

      The queen, whom sense of honour could not move,
      No longer made a secret of her love,
      But call’d it marriage, by that specious name
      To veil the crime and sanctify the shame.

      The loud report thro’ Libyan cities goes.
      Fame, the great ill, from small beginnings grows:
      Swift from the first; and ev’ry moment brings
      New vigour to her flights, new pinions to her wings.
      Soon grows the pigmy to gigantic size;
      Her feet on earth, her forehead in the skies.
      Inrag’d against the gods, revengeful Earth
      Produc’d her last of the Titanian birth.
      Swift is her walk, more swift her winged haste:
      A monstrous phantom, horrible and vast.
      As many plumes as raise her lofty flight,
      So many piercing eyes inlarge her sight;
      Millions of opening mouths to Fame belong,
      And ev’ry mouth is furnish’d with a tongue,
      And round with list’ning ears the flying plague is hung.
      She fills the peaceful universe with cries;
      No slumbers ever close her wakeful eyes;
      By day, from lofty tow’rs her head she shews,
      And spreads thro’ trembling crowds disastrous news;
      With court informers haunts, and royal spies;
      Things done relates, not done she feigns, and mingles truth with
      lies.

      Talk is her business, and her chief delight
      To tell of prodigies and cause affright.
      She fills the people’s ears with Dido’s name,
      Who, lost to honour and the sense of shame,
      Admits into her throne and nuptial bed
      A wand’ring guest, who from his country fled:
      Whole days with him she passes in delights,
      And wastes in luxury long winter nights,
      Forgetful of her fame and royal trust,
      Dissolv’d in ease, abandon’d to her lust.

      The goddess widely spreads the loud report,
      And flies at length to King Hyarba’s court.
      When first possess’d with this unwelcome news
      Whom did he not of men and gods accuse?
      This prince, from ravish’d Garamantis born,
      A hundred temples did with spoils adorn,
      In Ammon’s honour, his celestial sire;
      A hundred altars fed with wakeful fire;
      And, thro’ his vast dominions, priests ordain’d,
      Whose watchful care these holy rites maintain’d.
      The gates and columns were with garlands crown’d,
      And blood of victim beasts enrich’d the ground.

      He, when he heard a fugitive could move
      The Tyrian princess, who disdain’d his love,
      His breast with fury burn’d, his eyes with fire,
      Mad with despair, impatient with desire;
      Then on the sacred altars pouring wine,
      He thus with pray’rs implor’d his sire divine:
      “Great Jove! propitious to the Moorish race,
      Who feast on painted beds, with off’rings grace
      Thy temples, and adore thy pow’r divine
      With blood of victims, and with sparkling wine,
      Seest thou not this? or do we fear in vain
      Thy boasted thunder, and thy thoughtless reign?
      Do thy broad hands the forky lightnings lance?
      Thine are the bolts, or the blind work of chance?
      A wand’ring woman builds, within our state,
      A little town, bought at an easy rate;
      She pays me homage, and my grants allow
      A narrow space of Libyan lands to plow;
      Yet, scorning me, by passion blindly led,
      Admits a banish’d Trojan to her bed!
      And now this other Paris, with his train
      Of conquer’d cowards, must in Afric reign!
      (Whom, what they are, their looks and garb confess,
      Their locks with oil perfum’d, their Lydian dress.)
      He takes the spoil, enjoys the princely dame;
      And I, rejected I, adore an empty name.”

      His vows, in haughty terms, he thus preferr’d,
      And held his altar’s horns. The mighty Thund’rer heard;
      Then cast his eyes on Carthage, where he found
      The lustful pair in lawless pleasure drown’d,
      Lost in their loves, insensible of shame,
      And both forgetful of their better fame.
      He calls Cyllenius, and the god attends,
      By whom his menacing command he sends:
      “Go, mount the western winds, and cleave the sky;
      Then, with a swift descent, to Carthage fly:
      There find the Trojan chief, who wastes his days
      In slothful riot and inglorious ease,
      Nor minds the future city, giv’n by fate.
      To him this message from my mouth relate:
      ‘Not so fair Venus hop’d, when twice she won
      Thy life with pray’rs, nor promis’d such a son.
      Hers was a hero, destin’d to command
      A martial race, and rule the Latian land,
      Who should his ancient line from Teucer draw,
      And on the conquer’d world impose the law.’
      If glory cannot move a mind so mean,
      Nor future praise from fading pleasure wean,
      Yet why should he defraud his son of fame,
      And grudge the Romans their immortal name!
      What are his vain designs! what hopes he more
      From his long ling’ring on a hostile shore,
      Regardless to redeem his honour lost,
      And for his race to gain th’ Ausonian coast!
      Bid him with speed the Tyrian court forsake;
      With this command the slumb’ring warrior wake.”

      Hermes obeys; with golden pinions binds
      His flying feet, and mounts the western winds:
      And, whether o’er the seas or earth he flies,
      With rapid force they bear him down the skies.
      But first he grasps within his awful hand
      The mark of sov’reign pow’r, his magic wand;
      With this he draws the ghosts from hollow graves;
      With this he drives them down the Stygian waves;
      With this he seals in sleep the wakeful sight,
      And eyes, tho’ clos’d in death, restores to light.
      Thus arm’d, the god begins his airy race,
      And drives the racking clouds along the liquid space;
      Now sees the tops of Atlas, as he flies,
      Whose brawny back supports the starry skies;
      Atlas, whose head, with piny forests crown’d,
      Is beaten by the winds, with foggy vapours bound.
      Snows hide his shoulders; from beneath his chin
      The founts of rolling streams their race begin;
      A beard of ice on his large breast depends.
      Here, pois’d upon his wings, the god descends:
      Then, rested thus, he from the tow’ring height
      Plung’d downward, with precipitated flight,
      Lights on the seas, and skims along the flood.
      As waterfowl, who seek their fishy food,
      Less, and yet less, to distant prospect show;
      By turns they dance aloft, and dive below:
      Like these, the steerage of his wings he plies,
      And near the surface of the water flies,
      Till, having pass’d the seas, and cross’d the sands,
      He clos’d his wings, and stoop’d on Libyan lands:
      Where shepherds once were hous’d in homely sheds,
      Now tow’rs within the clouds advance their heads.
      Arriving there, he found the Trojan prince
      New ramparts raising for the town’s defence.
      A purple scarf, with gold embroider’d o’er,
      (Queen Dido’s gift,) about his waist he wore;
      A sword, with glitt’ring gems diversified,
      For ornament, not use, hung idly by his side.

      Then thus, with winged words, the god began,
      Resuming his own shape: “Degenerate man,
      Thou woman’s property, what mak’st thou here,
      These foreign walls and Tyrian tow’rs to rear,
      Forgetful of thy own? All-pow’rful Jove,
      Who sways the world below and heav’n above,
      Has sent me down with this severe command:
      What means thy ling’ring in the Libyan land?
      If glory cannot move a mind so mean,
      Nor future praise from flitting pleasure wean,
      Regard the fortunes of thy rising heir:
      The promis’d crown let young Ascanius wear,
      To whom th’ Ausonian scepter, and the state
      Of Rome’s imperial name is ow’d by fate.”
      So spoke the god; and, speaking, took his flight,
      Involv’d in clouds, and vanish’d out of sight.

      The pious prince was seiz’d with sudden fear;
      Mute was his tongue, and upright stood his hair.
      Revolving in his mind the stern command,
      He longs to fly, and loathes the charming land.
      What should he say? or how should he begin?
      What course, alas! remains to steer between
      Th’ offended lover and the pow’rful queen?
      This way and that he turns his anxious mind,
      And all expedients tries, and none can find.
      Fix’d on the deed, but doubtful of the means,
      After long thought, to this advice he leans:
      Three chiefs he calls, commands them to repair
      The fleet, and ship their men with silent care;
      Some plausible pretence he bids them find,
      To colour what in secret he design’d.
      Himself, meantime, the softest hours would choose,
      Before the love-sick lady heard the news;
      And move her tender mind, by slow degrees,
      To suffer what the sov’reign pow’r decrees:
      Jove will inspire him, when, and what to say.
      They hear with pleasure, and with haste obey.

      But soon the queen perceives the thin disguise:
      (What arts can blind a jealous woman’s eyes!)
      She was the first to find the secret fraud,
      Before the fatal news was blaz’d abroad.
      Love the first motions of the lover hears,
      Quick to presage, and ev’n in safety fears.
      Nor impious Fame was wanting to report
      The ships repair’d, the Trojans’ thick resort,
      And purpose to forsake the Tyrian court.
      Frantic with fear, impatient of the wound,
      And impotent of mind, she roves the city round.
      Less wild the Bacchanalian dames appear,
      When, from afar, their nightly god they hear,
      And howl about the hills, and shake the wreathy spear.
      At length she finds the dear perfidious man;
      Prevents his form’d excuse, and thus began:
      “Base and ungrateful! could you hope to fly,
      And undiscover’d scape a lover’s eye?
      Nor could my kindness your compassion move.
      Nor plighted vows, nor dearer bands of love?
      Or is the death of a despairing queen
      Not worth preventing, tho’ too well foreseen?
      Ev’n when the wintry winds command your stay,
      You dare the tempests, and defy the sea.
      False as you are, suppose you were not bound
      To lands unknown, and foreign coasts to sound;
      Were Troy restor’d, and Priam’s happy reign,
      Now durst you tempt, for Troy, the raging main?
      See whom you fly! am I the foe you shun?
      Now, by those holy vows, so late begun,
      By this right hand, (since I have nothing more
      To challenge, but the faith you gave before;)
      I beg you by these tears too truly shed,
      By the new pleasures of our nuptial bed;
      If ever Dido, when you most were kind,
      Were pleasing in your eyes, or touch’d your mind;
      By these my pray’rs, if pray’rs may yet have place,
      Pity the fortunes of a falling race.
      For you I have provok’d a tyrant’s hate,
      Incens’d the Libyan and the Tyrian state;
      For you alone I suffer in my fame,
      Bereft of honour, and expos’d to shame.
      Whom have I now to trust, ungrateful guest?
      (That only name remains of all the rest!)
      What have I left? or whither can I fly?
      Must I attend Pygmalion’s cruelty,
      Or till Hyarba shall in triumph lead
      A queen that proudly scorn’d his proffer’d bed?
      Had you deferr’d, at least, your hasty flight,
      And left behind some pledge of our delight,
      Some babe to bless the mother’s mournful sight,
      Some young Aeneas, to supply your place,
      Whose features might express his father’s face;
      I should not then complain to live bereft
      Of all my husband, or be wholly left.”

      Here paus’d the queen. Unmov’d he holds his eyes,
      By Jove’s command; nor suffer’d love to rise,
      Tho’ heaving in his heart; and thus at length replies:
      “Fair queen, you never can enough repeat
      Your boundless favours, or I own my debt;
      Nor can my mind forget Eliza’s name,
      While vital breath inspires this mortal frame.
      This only let me speak in my defence:
      I never hop’d a secret flight from hence,
      Much less pretended to the lawful claim
      Of sacred nuptials, or a husband’s name.
      For, if indulgent Heav’n would leave me free,
      And not submit my life to fate’s decree,
      My choice would lead me to the Trojan shore,
      Those relics to review, their dust adore,
      And Priam’s ruin’d palace to restore.
      But now the Delphian oracle commands,
      And fate invites me to the Latian lands.
      That is the promis’d place to which I steer,
      And all my vows are terminated there.
      If you, a Tyrian, and a stranger born,
      With walls and tow’rs a Libyan town adorn,
      Why may not we, like you, a foreign race,
      Like you, seek shelter in a foreign place?
      As often as the night obscures the skies
      With humid shades, or twinkling stars arise,
      Anchises’ angry ghost in dreams appears,
      Chides my delay, and fills my soul with fears;
      And young Ascanius justly may complain
      Of his defrauded and destin’d reign.
      Ev’n now the herald of the gods appear’d:
      Waking I saw him, and his message heard.
      From Jove he came commission’d, heav’nly bright
      With radiant beams, and manifest to sight
      (The sender and the sent I both attest)
      These walls he enter’d, and those words express’d.
      Fair queen, oppose not what the gods command;
      Forc’d by my fate, I leave your happy land.”

      Thus while he spoke, already she began,
      With sparkling eyes, to view the guilty man;
      From head to foot survey’d his person o’er,
      Nor longer these outrageous threats forebore:
      “False as thou art, and, more than false, forsworn!
      Not sprung from noble blood, nor goddess-born,
      But hewn from harden’d entrails of a rock!
      And rough Hyrcanian tigers gave thee suck!
      Why should I fawn? what have I worse to fear?
      Did he once look, or lent a list’ning ear,
      Sigh’d when I sobb’d, or shed one kindly tear?
      All symptoms of a base ungrateful mind,
      So foul, that, which is worse, ’tis hard to find.
      Of man’s injustice why should I complain?
      The gods, and Jove himself, behold in vain
      Triumphant treason; yet no thunder flies,
      Nor Juno views my wrongs with equal eyes;
      Faithless is earth, and faithless are the skies!
      Justice is fled, and Truth is now no more!
      I sav’d the shipwreck’d exile on my shore;
      With needful food his hungry Trojans fed;
      I took the traitor to my throne and bed:
      Fool that I was—— ’tis little to repeat
      The rest, I stor’d and rigg’d his ruin’d fleet.
      I rave, I rave! A god’s command he pleads,
      And makes Heav’n accessary to his deeds.
      Now Lycian lots, and now the Delian god,
      Now Hermes is employ’d from Jove’s abode,
      To warn him hence; as if the peaceful state
      Of heav’nly pow’rs were touch’d with human fate!
      But go! thy flight no longer I detain;
      Go seek thy promis’d kingdom thro’ the main!
      Yet, if the heav’ns will hear my pious vow,
      The faithless waves, not half so false as thou,
      Or secret sands, shall sepulchers afford
      To thy proud vessels, and their perjur’d lord.
      Then shalt thou call on injur’d Dido’s name:
      Dido shall come in a black sulph’ry flame,
      When death has once dissolv’d her mortal frame;
      Shall smile to see the traitor vainly weep:
      Her angry ghost, arising from the deep,
      Shall haunt thee waking, and disturb thy sleep.
      At least my shade thy punishment shall know,
      And Fame shall spread the pleasing news below.”

      Abruptly here she stops; then turns away
      Her loathing eyes, and shuns the sight of day.
      Amaz’d he stood, revolving in his mind
      What speech to frame, and what excuse to find.
      Her fearful maids their fainting mistress led,
      And softly laid her on her ivory bed.

      But good Aeneas, tho’ he much desir’d
      To give that pity which her grief requir’d;
      Tho’ much he mourn’d, and labour’d with his love,
      Resolv’d at length, obeys the will of Jove;
      Reviews his forces: they with early care
      Unmoor their vessels, and for sea prepare.
      The fleet is soon afloat, in all its pride,
      And well-calk’d galleys in the harbour ride.
      Then oaks for oars they fell’d; or, as they stood,
      Of its green arms despoil’d the growing wood,
      Studious of flight. The beach is cover’d o’er
      With Trojan bands, that blacken all the shore:
      On ev’ry side are seen, descending down,
      Thick swarms of soldiers, loaden from the town.
      Thus, in battalia, march embodied ants,
      Fearful of winter, and of future wants,
      T’ invade the corn, and to their cells convey
      The plunder’d forage of their yellow prey.
      The sable troops, along the narrow tracks,
      Scarce bear the weighty burthen on their backs:
      Some set their shoulders to the pond’rous grain;
      Some guard the spoil; some lash the lagging train;
      All ply their sev’ral tasks, and equal toil sustain.

      What pangs the tender breast of Dido tore,
      When, from the tow’r, she saw the cover’d shore,
      And heard the shouts of sailors from afar,
      Mix’d with the murmurs of the wat’ry war!
      All-pow’rful Love! what changes canst thou cause
      In human hearts, subjected to thy laws!
      Once more her haughty soul the tyrant bends:
      To pray’rs and mean submissions she descends.
      No female arts or aids she left untried,
      Nor counsels unexplor’d, before she died.
      “Look, Anna! look! the Trojans crowd to sea;
      They spread their canvas, and their anchors weigh.
      The shouting crew their ships with garlands bind,
      Invoke the sea gods, and invite the wind.
      Could I have thought this threat’ning blow so near,
      My tender soul had been forewarn’d to bear.
      But do not you my last request deny;
      With yon perfidious man your int’rest try,
      And bring me news, if I must live or die.
      You are his fav’rite; you alone can find
      The dark recesses of his inmost mind:
      In all his trusted secrets you have part,
      And know the soft approaches to his heart.
      Haste then, and humbly seek my haughty foe;
      Tell him, I did not with the Grecians go,
      Nor did my fleet against his friends employ,
      Nor swore the ruin of unhappy Troy,
      Nor mov’d with hands profane his father’s dust:
      Why should he then reject a suit so just!
      Whom does he shun, and whither would he fly!
      Can he this last, this only pray’r deny!
      Let him at least his dang’rous flight delay,
      Wait better winds, and hope a calmer sea.
      The nuptials he disclaims I urge no more:
      Let him pursue the promis’d Latian shore.
      A short delay is all I ask him now;
      A pause of grief, an interval from woe,
      Till my soft soul be temper’d to sustain
      Accustom’d sorrows, and inur’d to pain.
      If you in pity grant this one request,
      My death shall glut the hatred of his breast.”
      This mournful message pious Anna bears,
      And seconds with her own her sister’s tears:
      But all her arts are still employ’d in vain;
      Again she comes, and is refus’d again.
      His harden’d heart nor pray’rs nor threat’nings move;
      Fate, and the god, had stopp’d his ears to love.

      As, when the winds their airy quarrel try,
      Justling from ev’ry quarter of the sky,
      This way and that the mountain oak they bend,
      His boughs they shatter, and his branches rend;
      With leaves and falling mast they spread the ground;
      The hollow valleys echo to the sound:
      Unmov’d, the royal plant their fury mocks,
      Or, shaken, clings more closely to the rocks;
      Far as he shoots his tow’ring head on high,
      So deep in earth his fix’d foundations lie.
      No less a storm the Trojan hero bears;
      Thick messages and loud complaints he hears,
      And bandied words, still beating on his ears.
      Sighs, groans, and tears proclaim his inward pains;
      But the firm purpose of his heart remains.

      The wretched queen, pursued by cruel fate,
      Begins at length the light of heav’n to hate,
      And loathes to live. Then dire portents she sees,
      To hasten on the death her soul decrees:
      Strange to relate! for when, before the shrine,
      She pours in sacrifice the purple wine,
      The purple wine is turn’d to putrid blood,
      And the white offer’d milk converts to mud.
      This dire presage, to her alone reveal’d,
      From all, and ev’n her sister, she conceal’d.
      A marble temple stood within the grove,
      Sacred to death, and to her murder’d love;
      That honour’d chapel she had hung around
      With snowy fleeces, and with garlands crown’d:
      Oft, when she visited this lonely dome,
      Strange voices issued from her husband’s tomb;
      She thought she heard him summon her away,
      Invite her to his grave, and chide her stay.
      Hourly ’tis heard, when with a boding note
      The solitary screech owl strains her throat,
      And, on a chimney’s top, or turret’s height,
      With songs obscene disturbs the silence of the night.
      Besides, old prophecies augment her fears;
      And stern Aeneas in her dreams appears,
      Disdainful as by day: she seems, alone,
      To wander in her sleep, thro’ ways unknown,
      Guideless and dark; or, in a desert plain,
      To seek her subjects, and to seek in vain:
      Like Pentheus, when, distracted with his fear,
      He saw two suns, and double Thebes, appear;
      Or mad Orestes, when his mother’s ghost
      Full in his face infernal torches toss’d,
      And shook her snaky locks: he shuns the sight,
      Flies o’er the stage, surpris’d with mortal fright;
      The Furies guard the door and intercept his flight.

      Now, sinking underneath a load of grief,
      From death alone she seeks her last relief;
      The time and means resolv’d within her breast,
      She to her mournful sister thus address’d
      (Dissembling hope, her cloudy front she clears,
      And a false vigour in her eyes appears):
      “Rejoice!” she said. “Instructed from above,
      My lover I shall gain, or lose my love.
      Nigh rising Atlas, next the falling sun,
      Long tracts of Ethiopian climates run:
      There a Massylian priestess I have found,
      Honour’d for age, for magic arts renown’d:
      Th’ Hesperian temple was her trusted care;
      ’Twas she supplied the wakeful dragon’s fare.
      She poppy seeds in honey taught to steep,
      Reclaim’d his rage, and sooth’d him into sleep.
      She watch’d the golden fruit; her charms unbind
      The chains of love, or fix them on the mind:
      She stops the torrents, leaves the channel dry,
      Repels the stars, and backward bears the sky.
      The yawning earth rebellows to her call,
      Pale ghosts ascend, and mountain ashes fall.
      Witness, ye gods, and thou my better part,
      How loth I am to try this impious art!
      Within the secret court, with silent care,
      Erect a lofty pile, expos’d in air:
      Hang on the topmost part the Trojan vest,
      Spoils, arms, and presents, of my faithless guest.
      Next, under these, the bridal bed be plac’d,
      Where I my ruin in his arms embrac’d:
      All relics of the wretch are doom’d to fire;
      For so the priestess and her charms require.”

      Thus far she said, and farther speech forbears;
      A mortal paleness in her face appears:
      Yet the mistrustless Anna could not find
      The secret fun’ral in these rites design’d;
      Nor thought so dire a rage possess’d her mind.
      Unknowing of a train conceal’d so well,
      She fear’d no worse than when Sichaeus fell;
      Therefore obeys. The fatal pile they rear,
      Within the secret court, expos’d in air.
      The cloven holms and pines are heap’d on high,
      And garlands on the hollow spaces lie.
      Sad cypress, vervain, yew, compose the wreath,
      And ev’ry baleful green denoting death.
      The queen, determin’d to the fatal deed,
      The spoils and sword he left, in order spread,
      And the man’s image on the nuptial bed.

      And now (the sacred altars plac’d around)
      The priestess enters, with her hair unbound,
      And thrice invokes the pow’rs below the ground.
      Night, Erebus, and Chaos she proclaims,
      And threefold Hecate, with her hundred names,
      And three Dianas: next, she sprinkles round
      With feign’d Avernian drops the hallow’d ground;
      Culls hoary simples, found by Phoebe’s light,
      With brazen sickles reap’d at noon of night;
      Then mixes baleful juices in the bowl,
      And cuts the forehead of a newborn foal,
      Robbing the mother’s love. The destin’d queen
      Observes, assisting at the rites obscene;
      A leaven’d cake in her devoted hands
      She holds, and next the highest altar stands:
      One tender foot was shod, her other bare;
      Girt was her gather’d gown, and loose her hair.
      Thus dress’d, she summon’d, with her dying breath,
      The heav’ns and planets conscious of her death,
      And ev’ry pow’r, if any rules above,
      Who minds, or who revenges, injur’d love.

      “’Twas dead of night, when weary bodies close
      Their eyes in balmy sleep and soft repose:
      The winds no longer whisper thro’ the woods,
      Nor murm’ring tides disturb the gentle floods.
      The stars in silent order mov’d around;
      And Peace, with downy wings, was brooding on the ground
      The flocks and herds, and party-colour’d fowl,
      Which haunt the woods, or swim the weedy pool,
      Stretch’d on the quiet earth, securely lay,
      Forgetting the past labours of the day.
      All else of nature’s common gift partake:
      Unhappy Dido was alone awake.
      Nor sleep nor ease the furious queen can find;
      Sleep fled her eyes, as quiet fled her mind.
      Despair, and rage, and love divide her heart;
      Despair and rage had some, but love the greater part.

      Then thus she said within her secret mind:
      “What shall I do? what succour can I find?
      Become a suppliant to Hyarba’s pride,
      And take my turn, to court and be denied?
      Shall I with this ungrateful Trojan go,
      Forsake an empire, and attend a foe?
      Himself I refug’d, and his train reliev’d;
      ’Tis true; but am I sure to be receiv’d?
      Can gratitude in Trojan souls have place!
      Laomedon still lives in all his race!
      Then, shall I seek alone the churlish crew,
      Or with my fleet their flying sails pursue?
      What force have I but those whom scarce before
      I drew reluctant from their native shore?
      Will they again embark at my desire,
      Once more sustain the seas, and quit their second Tyre?
      Rather with steel thy guilty breast invade,
      And take the fortune thou thyself hast made.
      Your pity, sister, first seduc’d my mind,
      Or seconded too well what I design’d.
      These dear-bought pleasures had I never known,
      Had I continued free, and still my own;
      Avoiding love, I had not found despair,
      But shar’d with salvage beasts the common air.
      Like them, a lonely life I might have led,
      Not mourn’d the living, nor disturb’d the dead.”
      These thoughts she brooded in her anxious breast.
      On board, the Trojan found more easy rest.
      Resolv’d to sail, in sleep he pass’d the night;
      And order’d all things for his early flight.

      To whom once more the winged god appears;
      His former youthful mien and shape he wears,
      And with this new alarm invades his ears:
      “Sleep’st thou, O goddess-born! and canst thou drown
      Thy needful cares, so near a hostile town,
      Beset with foes; nor hear’st the western gales
      Invite thy passage, and inspire thy sails?
      She harbours in her heart a furious hate,
      And thou shalt find the dire effects too late;
      Fix’d on revenge, and obstinate to die.
      Haste swiftly hence, while thou hast pow’r to fly.
      The sea with ships will soon be cover’d o’er,
      And blazing firebrands kindle all the shore.
      Prevent her rage, while night obscures the skies,
      And sail before the purple morn arise.
      Who knows what hazards thy delay may bring?
      Woman’s a various and a changeful thing.”
      Thus Hermes in the dream; then took his flight
      Aloft in air unseen, and mix’d with night.

      Twice warn’d by the celestial messenger,
      The pious prince arose with hasty fear;
      Then rous’d his drowsy train without delay:
      “Haste to your banks; your crooked anchors weigh,
      And spread your flying sails, and stand to sea.
      A god commands: he stood before my sight,
      And urg’d us once again to speedy flight.
      O sacred pow’r, what pow’r soe’er thou art,
      To thy blest orders I resign my heart.
      Lead thou the way; protect thy Trojan bands,
      And prosper the design thy will commands.”
      He said: and, drawing forth his flaming sword,
      His thund’ring arm divides the many-twisted cord.
      An emulating zeal inspires his train:
      They run; they snatch; they rush into the main.
      With headlong haste they leave the desert shores,
      And brush the liquid seas with lab’ring oars.

      Aurora now had left her saffron bed,
      And beams of early light the heav’ns o’erspread,
      When, from a tow’r, the queen, with wakeful eyes,
      Saw day point upward from the rosy skies.
      She look’d to seaward; but the sea was void,
      And scarce in ken the sailing ships descried.
      Stung with despite, and furious with despair,
      She struck her trembling breast, and tore her hair.
      “And shall th’ ungrateful traitor go,” she said,
      “My land forsaken, and my love betray’d?
      Shall we not arm? not rush from ev’ry street,
      To follow, sink, and burn his perjur’d fleet?
      Haste, haul my galleys out! pursue the foe!
      Bring flaming brands! set sail, and swiftly row!
      What have I said? where am I? Fury turns
      My brain; and my distemper’d bosom burns.
      Then, when I gave my person and my throne,
      This hate, this rage, had been more timely shown.
      See now the promis’d faith, the vaunted name,
      The pious man, who, rushing thro’ the flame,
      Preserv’d his gods, and to the Phrygian shore
      The burthen of his feeble father bore!
      I should have torn him piecemeal; strow’d in floods
      His scatter’d limbs, or left expos’d in woods;
      Destroy’d his friends and son; and, from the fire,
      Have set the reeking boy before the sire.
      Events are doubtful, which on battles wait:
      Yet where’s the doubt, to souls secure of fate?
      My Tyrians, at their injur’d queen’s command,
      Had toss’d their fires amid the Trojan band;
      At once extinguish’d all the faithless name;
      And I myself, in vengeance of my shame,
      Had fall’n upon the pile, to mend the fun’ral flame.
      Thou Sun, who view’st at once the world below;
      Thou Juno, guardian of the nuptial vow;
      Thou Hecate hearken from thy dark abodes!
      Ye Furies, fiends, and violated gods,
      All pow’rs invok’d with Dido’s dying breath,
      Attend her curses and avenge her death!
      If so the Fates ordain, Jove commands,
      Th’ ungrateful wretch should find the Latian lands,
      Yet let a race untam’d, and haughty foes,
      His peaceful entrance with dire arms oppose:
      Oppress’d with numbers in th’ unequal field,
      His men discourag’d, and himself expell’d,
      Let him for succour sue from place to place,
      Torn from his subjects, and his son’s embrace.
      First, let him see his friends in battle slain,
      And their untimely fate lament in vain;
      And when, at length, the cruel war shall cease,
      On hard conditions may he buy his peace:
      Nor let him then enjoy supreme command;
      But fall, untimely, by some hostile hand,
      And lie unburied on the barren sand!
      These are my pray’rs, and this my dying will;
      And you, my Tyrians, ev’ry curse fulfil.
      Perpetual hate and mortal wars proclaim,
      Against the prince, the people, and the name.
      These grateful off’rings on my grave bestow;
      Nor league, nor love, the hostile nations know!
      Now, and from hence, in ev’ry future age,
      When rage excites your arms, and strength supplies the rage
      Rise some avenger of our Libyan blood,
      With fire and sword pursue the perjur’d brood;
      Our arms, our seas, our shores, oppos’d to theirs;
      And the same hate descend on all our heirs!”

      This said, within her anxious mind she weighs
      The means of cutting short her odious days.
      Then to Sichaeus’ nurse she briefly said
      (For, when she left her country, hers was dead):
      “Go, Barce, call my sister. Let her care
      The solemn rites of sacrifice prepare;
      The sheep, and all th’ atoning off’rings bring,
      Sprinkling her body from the crystal spring
      With living drops; then let her come, and thou
      With sacred fillets bind thy hoary brow.
      Thus will I pay my vows to Stygian Jove,
      And end the cares of my disastrous love;
      Then cast the Trojan image on the fire,
      And, as that burns, my passions shall expire.”

      The nurse moves onward, with officious care,
      And all the speed her aged limbs can bear.
      But furious Dido, with dark thoughts involv’d,
      Shook at the mighty mischief she resolv’d.
      With livid spots distinguish’d was her face;
      Red were her rolling eyes, and discompos’d her pace;
      Ghastly she gaz’d, with pain she drew her breath,
      And nature shiver’d at approaching death.

      Then swiftly to the fatal place she pass’d,
      And mounts the fun’ral pile with furious haste;
      Unsheathes the sword the Trojan left behind
      (Not for so dire an enterprise design’d).
      But when she view’d the garments loosely spread,
      Which once he wore, and saw the conscious bed,
      She paus’d, and with a sigh the robes embrac’d;
      Then on the couch her trembling body cast,
      Repress’d the ready tears, and spoke her last:
      “Dear pledges of my love, while Heav’n so pleas’d,
      Receive a soul, of mortal anguish eas’d:
      My fatal course is finish’d; and I go,
      A glorious name, among the ghosts below.
      A lofty city by my hands is rais’d,
      Pygmalion punish’d, and my lord appeas’d.
      What could my fortune have afforded more,
      Had the false Trojan never touch’d my shore!”
      Then kiss’d the couch; and, “Must I die,” she said,
      “And unreveng’d? ’Tis doubly to be dead!
      Yet ev’n this death with pleasure I receive:
      On any terms, ’tis better than to live.
      These flames, from far, may the false Trojan view;
      These boding omens his base flight pursue!”

      She said, and struck; deep enter’d in her side
      The piercing steel, with reeking purple dyed:
      Clogg’d in the wound the cruel weapon stands;
      The spouting blood came streaming on her hands.
      Her sad attendants saw the deadly stroke,
      And with loud cries the sounding palace shook.
      Distracted, from the fatal sight they fled,
      And thro’ the town the dismal rumour spread.
      First from the frighted court the yell began;
      Redoubled, thence from house to house it ran:
      The groans of men, with shrieks, laments, and cries
      Of mixing women, mount the vaulted skies.
      Not less the clamour, than if ancient Tyre,
      Or the new Carthage, set by foes on fire,
      The rolling ruin, with their lov’d abodes,
      Involv’d the blazing temples of their gods.

      Her sister hears; and, furious with despair,
      She beats her breast, and rends her yellow hair,
      And, calling on Eliza’s name aloud,
      Runs breathless to the place, and breaks the crowd.
      “Was all that pomp of woe for this prepar’d;
      These fires, this fun’ral pile, these altars rear’d?
      Was all this train of plots contriv’d,” said she,
      “All only to deceive unhappy me?
      Which is the worst? Didst thou in death pretend
      To scorn thy sister, or delude thy friend?
      Thy summon’d sister, and thy friend, had come;
      One sword had serv’d us both, one common tomb:
      Was I to raise the pile, the pow’rs invoke,
      Not to be present at the fatal stroke?
      At once thou hast destroy’d thyself and me,
      Thy town, thy senate, and thy colony!
      Bring water; bathe the wound; while I in death
      Lay close my lips to hers, and catch the flying breath.”
      This said, she mounts the pile with eager haste,
      And in her arms the gasping queen embrac’d;
      Her temples chaf’d; and her own garments tore,
      To stanch the streaming blood, and cleanse the gore.
      Thrice Dido tried to raise her drooping head,
      And, fainting thrice, fell grov’ling on the bed;
      Thrice op’d her heavy eyes, and sought the light,
      But, having found it, sicken’d at the sight,
      And clos’d her lids at last in endless night.

      Then Juno, grieving that she should sustain
      A death so ling’ring, and so full of pain,
      Sent Iris down, to free her from the strife
      Of lab’ring nature, and dissolve her life.
      For since she died, not doom’d by Heav’n’s decree,
      Or her own crime, but human casualty,
      And rage of love, that plung’d her in despair,
      The Sisters had not cut the topmost hair,
      Which Proserpine and they can only know;
      Nor made her sacred to the shades below.
      Downward the various goddess took her flight,
      And drew a thousand colours from the light;
      Then stood above the dying lover’s head,
      And said: “I thus devote thee to the dead.
      This off’ring to th’ infernal gods I bear.”
      Thus while she spoke, she cut the fatal hair:
      The struggling soul was loos’d, and life dissolv’d in air.



 


      Meantime the Trojan cuts his wat’ry way,
      Fix’d on his voyage, thro’ the curling sea;
      Then, casting back his eyes, with dire amaze,
      Sees on the Punic shore the mounting blaze.
      The cause unknown; yet his presaging mind
      The fate of Dido from the fire divin’d;
      He knew the stormy souls of womankind,
      What secret springs their eager passions move,
      How capable of death for injur’d love.
      Dire auguries from hence the Trojans draw;
      Till neither fires nor shining shores they saw.
      Now seas and skies their prospect only bound;
      An empty space above, a floating field around.
      But soon the heav’ns with shadows were o’erspread;
      A swelling cloud hung hov’ring o’er their head:
      Livid it look’d, the threat’ning of a storm:
      Then night and horror ocean’s face deform.
      The pilot, Palinurus, cried aloud:
      “What gusts of weather from that gath’ring cloud
      My thoughts presage! Ere yet the tempest roars,
      Stand to your tackle, mates, and stretch your oars;
      Contract your swelling sails, and luff to wind.”
      The frighted crew perform the task assign’d.
      Then, to his fearless chief: “Not Heav’n,” said he,
      “Tho’ Jove himself should promise Italy,
      Can stem the torrent of this raging sea.
      Mark how the shifting winds from west arise,
      And what collected night involves the skies!
      Nor can our shaken vessels live at sea,
      Much less against the tempest force their way.
      ’Tis fate diverts our course, and fate we must obey.
      Not far from hence, if I observ’d aright
      The southing of the stars, and polar light,
      Sicilia lies, whose hospitable shores
      In safety we may reach with struggling oars.”
      Aeneas then replied: “Too sure I find
      We strive in vain against the seas and wind:
      Now shift your sails; what place can please me more
      Than what you promise, the Sicilian shore,
      Whose hallow’d earth Anchises’ bones contains,
      And where a prince of Trojan lineage reigns?”
      The course resolv’d, before the western wind
      They scud amain, and make the port assign’d.
      Meantime Acestes, from a lofty stand,
      Beheld the fleet descending on the land;
      And, not unmindful of his ancient race,
      Down from the cliff he ran with eager pace,
      And held the hero in a strict embrace.
      Of a rough Libyan bear the spoils he wore,
      And either hand a pointed jav’lin bore.
      His mother was a dame of Dardan blood;
      His sire Crinisus, a Sicilian flood.
      He welcomes his returning friends ashore
      With plenteous country cates and homely store.

      Now, when the following morn had chas’d away
      The flying stars, and light restor’d the day,
      Aeneas call’d the Trojan troops around,
      And thus bespoke them from a rising ground:
      “Offspring of heav’n, divine Dardanian race!
      The sun, revolving thro’ th’ ethereal space,
      The shining circle of the year has fill’d,
      Since first this isle my father’s ashes held:
      And now the rising day renews the year;
      A day for ever sad, for ever dear.
      This would I celebrate with annual games,
      With gifts on altars pil’d, and holy flames,
      Tho’ banish’d to Gaetulia’s barren sands,
      Caught on the Grecian seas, or hostile lands:
      But since this happy storm our fleet has driv’n
      (Not, as I deem, without the will of Heav’n)
      Upon these friendly shores and flow’ry plains,
      Which hide Anchises and his blest remains,
      Let us with joy perform his honours due,
      And pray for prosp’rous winds, our voyage to renew;
      Pray, that in towns and temples of our own,
      The name of great Anchises may be known,
      And yearly games may spread the gods’ renown.
      Our sports Acestes, of the Trojan race,
      With royal gifts ordain’d, is pleas’d to grace:
      Two steers on ev’ry ship the king bestows;
      His gods and ours shall share your equal vows.
      Besides, if, nine days hence, the rosy morn
      Shall with unclouded light the skies adorn,
      That day with solemn sports I mean to grace:
      Light galleys on the seas shall run a wat’ry race;
      Some shall in swiftness for the goal contend,
      And others try the twanging bow to bend;
      The strong, with iron gauntlets arm’d, shall stand
      Oppos’d in combat on the yellow sand.
      Let all be present at the games prepar’d,
      And joyful victors wait the just reward.
      But now assist the rites, with garlands crown’d.”
      He said, and first his brows with myrtle bound.
      Then Helymus, by his example led,
      And old Acestes, each adorn’d his head;
      Thus young Ascanius, with a sprightly grace,
      His temples tied, and all the Trojan race.

      Aeneas then advanc’d amidst the train,
      By thousands follow’d thro’ the flow’ry plain,
      To great Anchises’ tomb; which when he found,
      He pour’d to Bacchus, on the hallow’d ground,
      Two bowls of sparkling wine, of milk two more,
      And two from offer’d bulls of purple gore,
      With roses then the sepulcher he strow’d
      And thus his father’s ghost bespoke aloud:
      “Hail, O ye holy manes! hail again,
      Paternal ashes, now review’d in vain!
      The gods permitted not, that you, with me,
      Should reach the promis’d shores of Italy,
      Or Tiber’s flood, what flood soe’er it be.”
      Scarce had he finish’d, when, with speckled pride,
      A serpent from the tomb began to glide;
      His hugy bulk on sev’n high volumes roll’d;
      Blue was his breadth of back, but streak’d with scaly gold:
      Thus riding on his curls, he seem’d to pass
      A rolling fire along, and singe the grass.
      More various colours thro’ his body run,
      Than Iris when her bow imbibes the sun.
      Betwixt the rising altars, and around,
      The sacred monster shot along the ground;
      With harmless play amidst the bowls he pass’d,
      And with his lolling tongue assay’d the taste:
      Thus fed with holy food, the wondrous guest
      Within the hollow tomb retir’d to rest.
      The pious prince, surpris’d at what he view’d,
      The fun’ral honours with more zeal renew’d,
      Doubtful if this place’s genius were,
      Or guardian of his father’s sepulcher.
      Five sheep, according to the rites, he slew;
      As many swine, and steers of sable hue;
      New gen’rous wine he from the goblets pour’d.
      And call’d his father’s ghost, from hell restor’d.
      The glad attendants in long order come,
      Off’ring their gifts at great Anchises’ tomb:
      Some add more oxen: some divide the spoil;
      Some place the chargers on the grassy soil;
      Some blow the fires, and offered entrails broil.

      Now came the day desir’d. The skies were bright
      With rosy luster of the rising light:
      The bord’ring people, rous’d by sounding fame
      Of Trojan feasts and great Acestes’ name,
      The crowded shore with acclamations fill,
      Part to behold, and part to prove their skill.
      And first the gifts in public view they place,
      Green laurel wreaths, and palm, the victors’ grace:
      Within the circle, arms and tripods lie,
      Ingots of gold and silver, heap’d on high,
      And vests embroider’d, of the Tyrian dye.
      The trumpet’s clangour then the feast proclaims,
      And all prepare for their appointed games.
      Four galleys first, which equal rowers bear,
      Advancing, in the wat’ry lists appear.
      The speedy Dolphin, that outstrips the wind,
      Bore Mnestheus, author of the Memmian kind:
      Gyas the vast Chimaera’s bulk commands,
      Which rising, like a tow’ring city stands;
      Three Trojans tug at ev’ry lab’ring oar;
      Three banks in three degrees the sailors bore;
      Beneath their sturdy strokes the billows roar.
      Sergesthus, who began the Sergian race,
      In the great Centaur took the leading place;
      Cloanthus on the sea-green Scylla stood,
      From whom Cluentius draws his Trojan blood.

      Far in the sea, against the foaming shore,
      There stands a rock: the raging billows roar
      Above his head in storms; but, when ’tis clear,
      Uncurl their ridgy backs, and at his foot appear.
      In peace below the gentle waters run;
      The cormorants above lie basking in the sun.
      On this the hero fix’d an oak in sight,
      The mark to guide the mariners aright.
      To bear with this, the seamen stretch their oars;
      Then round the rock they steer, and seek the former shores.
      The lots decide their place. Above the rest,
      Each leader shining in his Tyrian vest;
      The common crew with wreaths of poplar boughs
      Their temples crown, and shade their sweaty brows:
      Besmear’d with oil, their naked shoulders shine.
      All take their seats, and wait the sounding sign:
      They gripe their oars; and ev’ry panting breast
      Is rais’d by turns with hope, by turns with fear depress’d.
      The clangour of the trumpet gives the sign;
      At once they start, advancing in a line:
      With shouts the sailors rend the starry skies;
      Lash’d with their oars, the smoky billows rise;
      Sparkles the briny main, and the vex’d ocean fries.
      Exact in time, with equal strokes they row:
      At once the brushing oars and brazen prow
      Dash up the sandy waves, and ope the depths below.
      Not fiery coursers, in a chariot race,
      Invade the field with half so swift a pace;
      Not the fierce driver with more fury lends
      The sounding lash, and, ere the stroke descends,
      Low to the wheels his pliant body bends.
      The partial crowd their hopes and fears divide,
      And aid with eager shouts the favour’d side.
      Cries, murmurs, clamours, with a mixing sound,
      From woods to woods, from hills to hills rebound.

      Amidst the loud applauses of the shore,
      Gyas outstripp’d the rest, and sprung before:
      Cloanthus, better mann’d, pursued him fast,
      But his o’er-masted galley check’d his haste.
      The Centaur and the Dolphin brush the brine
      With equal oars, advancing in a line;
      And now the mighty Centaur seems to lead,
      And now the speedy Dolphin gets ahead;
      Now board to board the rival vessels row,
      The billows lave the skies, and ocean groans below.
      They reach’d the mark; proud Gyas and his train
      In triumph rode, the victors of the main;
      But, steering round, he charg’d his pilot stand
      More close to shore, and skim along the sand.
      “Let others bear to sea!” Menoetes heard;
      But secret shelves too cautiously he fear’d,
      And, fearing, sought the deep; and still aloof he steer’d.
      With louder cries the captain call’d again:
      “Bear to the rocky shore, and shun the main.”
      He spoke, and, speaking, at his stern he saw
      The bold Cloanthus near the shelvings draw.
      Betwixt the mark and him the Scylla stood,
      And in a closer compass plow’d the flood.
      He pass’d the mark; and, wheeling, got before:
      Gyas blasphem’d the gods, devoutly swore,
      Cried out for anger, and his hair he tore.
      Mindless of others’ lives (so high was grown
      His rising rage) and careless of his own,
      The trembling dotard to the deck he drew;
      Then hoisted up, and overboard he threw:
      This done, he seiz’d the helm; his fellows cheer’d,
      Turn’d short upon the shelfs, and madly steer’d.

      Hardly his head the plunging pilot rears,
      Clogg’d with his clothes, and cumber’d with his years:
      Now dropping wet, he climbs the cliff with pain.
      The crowd, that saw him fall and float again,
      Shout from the distant shore; and loudly laugh’d,
      To see his heaving breast disgorge the briny draught.
      The following Centaur, and the Dolphin’s crew,
      Their vanish’d hopes of victory renew;
      While Gyas lags, they kindle in the race,
      To reach the mark. Sergesthus takes the place;
      Mnestheus pursues; and while around they wind,
      Comes up, not half his galley’s length behind;
      Then, on the deck, amidst his mates appear’d,
      And thus their drooping courages he cheer’d:
      “My friends, and Hector’s followers heretofore,
      Exert your vigour; tug the lab’ring oar;
      Stretch to your strokes, my still unconquer’d crew,
      Whom from the flaming walls of Troy I drew.
      In this, our common int’rest, let me find
      That strength of hand, that courage of the mind,
      As when you stemm’d the strong Malean flood,
      And o’er the Syrtes’ broken billows row’d.
      I seek not now the foremost palm to gain;
      Tho’ yet——But, ah! that haughty wish is vain!
      Let those enjoy it whom the gods ordain.
      But to be last, the lags of all the race!
      Redeem yourselves and me from that disgrace.”
      Now, one and all, they tug amain; they row
      At the full stretch, and shake the brazen prow.
      The sea beneath ’em sinks; their lab’ring sides
      Are swell’d, and sweat runs gutt’ring down in tides.
      Chance aids their daring with unhop’d success;
      Sergesthus, eager with his beak to press
      Betwixt the rival galley and the rock,
      Shuts up th’ unwieldly Centaur in the lock.
      The vessel struck; and, with the dreadful shock,
      Her oars she shiver’d, and her head she broke.
      The trembling rowers from their banks arise,
      And, anxious for themselves, renounce the prize.
      With iron poles they heave her off the shores,
      And gather from the sea their floating oars.
      The crew of Mnestheus, with elated minds,
      Urge their success, and call the willing winds;
      Then ply their oars, and cut their liquid way
      In larger compass on the roomy sea.
      As, when the dove her rocky hold forsakes,
      Rous’d in a fright, her sounding wings she shakes;
      The cavern rings with clatt’ring; out she flies,
      And leaves her callow care, and cleaves the skies:
      At first she flutters; but at length she springs
      To smoother flight, and shoots upon her wings:
      So Mnestheus in the Dolphin cuts the sea;
      And, flying with a force, that force assists his way.
      Sergesthus in the Centaur soon he pass’d,
      Wedg’d in the rocky shoals, and sticking fast.
      In vain the victor he with cries implores,
      And practices to row with shatter’d oars.
      Then Mnestheus bears with Gyas, and outflies:
      The ship, without a pilot, yields the prize.
      Unvanquish’d Scylla now alone remains;
      Her he pursues, and all his vigour strains.
      Shouts from the fav’ring multitude arise;
      Applauding Echo to the shouts replies;
      Shouts, wishes, and applause run rattling thro’ the skies.
      These clamours with disdain the Scylla heard,
      Much grudg’d the praise, but more the robb’d reward:
      Resolv’d to hold their own, they mend their pace,
      All obstinate to die, or gain the race.
      Rais’d with success, the Dolphin swiftly ran;
      For they can conquer, who believe they can.
      Both urge their oars, and fortune both supplies,
      And both perhaps had shar’d an equal prize;
      When to the seas Cloanthus holds his hands,
      And succour from the wat’ry pow’rs demands:
      “Gods of the liquid realms, on which I row!
      If, giv’n by you, the laurel bind my brow,
      Assist to make me guilty of my vow!
      A snow-white bull shall on your shore be slain;
      His offer’d entrails cast into the main,
      And ruddy wine, from golden goblets thrown,
      Your grateful gift and my return shall own.”
      The choir of nymphs, and Phorcus, from below,
      With virgin Panopea, heard his vow;
      And old Portunus, with his breadth of hand,
      Push’d on, and sped the galley to the land.
      Swift as a shaft, or winged wind, she flies,
      And, darting to the port, obtains the prize.

      The herald summons all, and then proclaims
      Cloanthus conqu’ror of the naval games.
      The prince with laurel crowns the victor’s head,
      And three fat steers are to his vessel led,
      The ship’s reward; with gen’rous wine beside,
      And sums of silver, which the crew divide.
      The leaders are distinguish’d from the rest;
      The victor honour’d with a nobler vest,
      Where gold and purple strive in equal rows,
      And needlework its happy cost bestows.
      There Ganymede is wrought with living art,
      Chasing thro’ Ida’s groves the trembling hart:
      Breathless he seems, yet eager to pursue;
      When from aloft descends, in open view,
      The bird of Jove, and, sousing on his prey,
      With crooked talons bears the boy away.
      In vain, with lifted hands and gazing eyes,
      His guards behold him soaring thro’ the skies,
      And dogs pursue his flight with imitated cries.

      Mnestheus the second victor was declar’d;
      And, summon’d there, the second prize he shar’d.
      A coat of mail, brave Demoleus bore,
      More brave Aeneas from his shoulders tore,
      In single combat on the Trojan shore:
      This was ordain’d for Mnestheus to possess;
      In war for his defence, for ornament in peace.
      Rich was the gift, and glorious to behold,
      But yet so pond’rous with its plates of gold,
      That scarce two servants could the weight sustain;
      Yet, loaded thus, Demoleus o’er the plain
      Pursued and lightly seiz’d the Trojan train.
      The third, succeeding to the last reward,
      Two goodly bowls of massy silver shar’d,
      With figures prominent, and richly wrought,
      And two brass caldrons from Dodona brought.

      Thus all, rewarded by the hero’s hands,
      Their conqu’ring temples bound with purple bands;
      And now Sergesthus, clearing from the rock,
      Brought back his galley shatter’d with the shock.
      Forlorn she look’d, without an aiding oar,
      And, houted by the vulgar, made to shore.
      As when a snake, surpris’d upon the road,
      Is crush’d athwart her body by the load
      Of heavy wheels; or with a mortal wound
      Her belly bruis’d, and trodden to the ground:
      In vain, with loosen’d curls, she crawls along;
      Yet, fierce above, she brandishes her tongue;
      Glares with her eyes, and bristles with her scales;
      But, groveling in the dust, her parts unsound she trails:
      So slowly to the port the Centaur tends,
      But, what she wants in oars, with sails amends.
      Yet, for his galley sav’d, the grateful prince
      Is pleas’d th’ unhappy chief to recompense.
      Pholoe, the Cretan slave, rewards his care,
      Beauteous herself, with lovely twins as fair.

      From thence his way the Trojan hero bent
      Into the neighb’ring plain, with mountains pent,
      Whose sides were shaded with surrounding wood.
      Full in the midst of this fair valley stood
      A native theatre, which, rising slow
      By just degrees, o’erlook’d the ground below.
      High on a sylvan throne the leader sate;
      A num’rous train attend in solemn state.
      Here those that in the rapid course delight,
      Desire of honour and the prize invite.
      The rival runners without order stand;
      The Trojans mix’d with the Sicilian band.
      First Nisus, with Euryalus, appears;
      Euryalus a boy of blooming years,
      With sprightly grace and equal beauty crown’d;
      Nisus, for friendship to the youth renown’d.
      Diores next, of Priam’s royal race,
      Then Salius joined with Patron, took their place;
      But Patron in Arcadia had his birth,
      And Salius his from Arcananian earth;
      Then two Sicilian youths, the names of these,
      Swift Helymus, and lovely Panopes:
      Both jolly huntsmen, both in forest bred,
      And owning old Acestes for their head;
      With sev’ral others of ignobler name,
      Whom time has not deliver’d o’er to fame.

      To these the hero thus his thoughts explain’d,
      In words which gen’ral approbation gain’d:
      “One common largess is for all design’d,
      The vanquish’d and the victor shall be join’d,
      Two darts of polish’d steel and Gnosian wood,
      A silver-studded ax alike bestow’d.
      The foremost three have olive wreaths decreed:
      The first of these obtains a stately steed,
      Adorn’d with trappings; and the next in fame,
      The quiver of an Amazonian dame,
      With feather’d Thracian arrows well supplied:
      A golden belt shall gird his manly side,
      Which with a sparkling diamond shall be tied.
      The third this Grecian helmet shall content.”
      He said. To their appointed base they went;
      With beating hearts th’ expected sign receive,
      And, starting all at once, the barrier leave.
      Spread out, as on the winged winds, they flew,
      And seiz’d the distant goal with greedy view.
      Shot from the crowd, swift Nisus all o’erpass’d;
      Nor storms, nor thunder, equal half his haste.
      The next, but tho’ the next, yet far disjoin’d,
      Came Salius, and Euryalus behind;
      Then Helymus, whom young Diores plied,
      Step after step, and almost side by side,
      His shoulders pressing; and, in longer space,
      Had won, or left at least a dubious race.

      Now, spent, the goal they almost reach at last,
      When eager Nisus, hapless in his haste,
      Slipp’d first, and, slipping, fell upon the plain,
      Soak’d with the blood of oxen newly slain.
      The careless victor had not mark’d his way;
      But, treading where the treach’rous puddle lay,
      His heels flew up; and on the grassy floor
      He fell, besmear’d with filth and holy gore.
      Not mindless then, Euryalus, of thee,
      Nor of the sacred bonds of amity,
      He strove th’ immediate rival’s hope to cross,
      And caught the foot of Salius as he rose.
      So Salius lay extended on the plain;
      Euryalus springs out, the prize to gain,
      And leaves the crowd: applauding peals attend
      The victor to the goal, who vanquish’d by his friend.
      Next Helymus; and then Diores came,
      By two misfortunes made the third in fame.

      But Salius enters, and, exclaiming loud
      For justice, deafens and disturbs the crowd;
      Urges his cause may in the court be heard;
      And pleads the prize is wrongfully conferr’d.
      But favour for Euryalus appears;
      His blooming beauty, with his tender tears,
      Had brib’d the judges for the promis’d prize.
      Besides, Diores fills the court with cries,
      Who vainly reaches at the last reward,
      If the first palm on Salius be conferr’d.
      Then thus the prince: “Let no disputes arise:
      Where fortune plac’d it, I award the prize.
      But fortune’s errors give me leave to mend,
      At least to pity my deserving friend.”
      He said, and, from among the spoils, he draws
      (Pond’rous with shaggy mane and golden paws)
      A lion’s hide: to Salius this he gives.
      Nisus with envy sees the gift, and grieves.
      “If such rewards to vanquish’d men are due.”
      He said, “and falling is to rise by you,
      What prize may Nisus from your bounty claim,
      Who merited the first rewards and fame?
      In falling, both an equal fortune tried;
      Would fortune for my fall so well provide!”
      With this he pointed to his face, and show’d
      His hand and all his habit smear’d with blood.
      Th’ indulgent father of the people smil’d,
      And caus’d to be produc’d an ample shield,
      Of wondrous art, by Didymaon wrought,
      Long since from Neptune’s bars in triumph brought.
      This giv’n to Nisus, he divides the rest,
      And equal justice in his gifts express’d.

      The race thus ended, and rewards bestow’d,
      Once more the prince bespeaks th’ attentive crowd:
      “If there be here, whose dauntless courage dare
      In gauntlet fight, with limbs and body bare,
      His opposite sustain in open view,
      Stand forth the champion, and the games renew.
      Two prizes I propose, and thus divide:
      A bull with gilded horns, and fillets tied,
      Shall be the portion of the conqu’ring chief;
      A sword and helm shall cheer the loser’s grief.”

      Then haughty Dares in the lists appears;
      Stalking he strides, his head erected bears:
      His nervous arms the weighty gauntlet wield,
      And loud applauses echo thro’ the field.
      Dares alone in combat us’d to stand
      The match of mighty Paris, hand to hand;
      The same, at Hector’s fun’rals, undertook
      Gigantic Butes, of th’ Amycian stock,
      And, by the stroke of his resistless hand,
      Stretch’d the vast bulk upon the yellow sand.
      Such Dares was; and such he strode along,
      And drew the wonder of the gazing throng.
      His brawny back and ample breast he shows,
      His lifted arms around his head he throws,
      And deals in whistling air his empty blows.
      His match is sought; but, thro’ the trembling band,
      Not one dares answer to the proud demand.
      Presuming of his force, with sparkling eyes
      Already he devours the promis’d prize.
      He claims the bull with awless insolence,
      And having seiz’d his horns, accosts the prince:
      “If none my matchless valour dares oppose,
      How long shall Dares wait his dastard foes?
      Permit me, chief, permit without delay,
      To lead this uncontended gift away.”
      The crowd assents, and with redoubled cries
      For the proud challenger demands the prize.

      Acestes, fir’d with just disdain, to see
      The palm usurp’d without a victory,
      Reproach’d Entellus thus, who sate beside,
      And heard and saw, unmov’d, the Trojan’s pride:
      “Once, but in vain, a champion of renown,
      So tamely can you bear the ravish’d crown,
      A prize in triumph borne before your sight,
      And shun, for fear, the danger of the fight?
      Where is our Eryx now, the boasted name,
      The god who taught your thund’ring arm the game?
      Where now your baffled honour? Where the spoil
      That fill’d your house, and fame that fill’d our isle?”
      Entellus, thus: “My soul is still the same,
      Unmov’d with fear, and mov’d with martial fame;
      But my chill blood is curdled in my veins,
      And scarce the shadow of a man remains.
      O could I turn to that fair prime again,
      That prime of which this boaster is so vain,
      The brave, who this decrepid age defies,
      Should feel my force, without the promis’d prize.”

      He said; and, rising at the word, he threw
      Two pond’rous gauntlets down in open view;
      Gauntlets which Eryx wont in fight to wield,
      And sheathe his hands with in the listed field.
      With fear and wonder seiz’d, the crowd beholds
      The gloves of death, with sev’n distinguish’d folds
      Of tough bull hides; the space within is spread
      With iron, or with loads of heavy lead:
      Dares himself was daunted at the sight,
      Renounc’d his challenge, and refus’d to fight.
      Astonish’d at their weight, the hero stands,
      And pois’d the pond’rous engines in his hands.
      “What had your wonder,” said Entellus, “been,
      Had you the gauntlets of Alcides seen,
      Or view’d the stern debate on this unhappy green!
      These which I bear your brother Eryx bore,
      Still mark’d with batter’d brains and mingled gore.
      With these he long sustain’d th’ Herculean arm;
      And these I wielded while my blood was warm,
      This languish’d frame while better spirits fed,
      Ere age unstrung my nerves, or time o’ersnow’d my head.
      But if the challenger these arms refuse,
      And cannot wield their weight, or dare not use;
      If great Aeneas and Acestes join
      In his request, these gauntlets I resign;
      Let us with equal arms perform the fight,
      And let him leave to fear, since I resign my right.”

      This said, Entellus for the strife prepares;
      Stripp’d of his quilted coat, his body bares;
      Compos’d of mighty bones and brawn he stands,
      A goodly tow’ring object on the sands.
      Then just Aeneas equal arms supplied,
      Which round their shoulders to their wrists they tied.
      Both on the tiptoe stand, at full extent,
      Their arms aloft, their bodies inly bent;
      Their heads from aiming blows they bear afar;
      With clashing gauntlets then provoke the war.
      One on his youth and pliant limbs relies;
      One on his sinews and his giant size.
      The last is stiff with age, his motion slow;
      He heaves for breath, he staggers to and fro,
      And clouds of issuing smoke his nostrils loudly blow.
      Yet equal in success, they ward, they strike;
      Their ways are diff’rent, but their art alike.
      Before, behind, the blows are dealt; around
      Their hollow sides the rattling thumps resound.
      A storm of strokes, well meant, with fury flies,
      And errs about their temples, ears, and eyes.
      Nor always errs; for oft the gauntlet draws
      A sweeping stroke along the crackling jaws.
      Heavy with age, Entellus stands his ground,
      But with his warping body wards the wound.
      His hand and watchful eye keep even pace;
      While Dares traverses and shifts his place,
      And, like a captain who beleaguers round
      Some strong-built castle on a rising ground,
      Views all th’ approaches with observing eyes:
      This and that other part in vain he tries,
      And more on industry than force relies.
      With hands on high, Entellus threats the foe;
      But Dares watch’d the motion from below,
      And slipp’d aside, and shunn’d the long descending blow.
      Entellus wastes his forces on the wind,
      And, thus deluded of the stroke design’d,
      Headlong and heavy fell; his ample breast
      And weighty limbs his ancient mother press’d.
      So falls a hollow pine, that long had stood
      On Ida’s height, or Erymanthus’ wood,
      Torn from the roots. The diff’ring nations rise,
      And shouts and mingled murmurs rend the skies,
      Acestus runs with eager haste, to raise
      The fall’n companion of his youthful days.
      Dauntless he rose, and to the fight return’d;
      With shame his glowing cheeks, his eyes with fury burn’d.
      Disdain and conscious virtue fir’d his breast,
      And with redoubled force his foe he press’d.
      He lays on load with either hand, amain,
      And headlong drives the Trojan o’er the plain;
      Nor stops, nor stays; nor rest nor breath allows;
      But storms of strokes descend about his brows,
      A rattling tempest, and a hail of blows.
      But now the prince, who saw the wild increase
      Of wounds, commands the combatants to cease,
      And bounds Entellus’ wrath, and bids the peace.
      First to the Trojan, spent with toil, he came,
      And sooth’d his sorrow for the suffer’d shame.
      “What fury seiz’d my friend? The gods,” said he,
      “To him propitious, and averse to thee,
      Have giv’n his arm superior force to thine.
      ’Tis madness to contend with strength divine.”
      The gauntlet fight thus ended, from the shore
      His faithful friends unhappy Dares bore:
      His mouth and nostrils pour’d a purple flood,
      And pounded teeth came rushing with his blood.
      Faintly he stagger’d thro’ the hissing throng,
      And hung his head, and trail’d his legs along.
      The sword and casque are carried by his train;
      But with his foe the palm and ox remain.

      The champion, then, before Aeneas came,
      Proud of his prize, but prouder of his fame:
      “O goddess-born, and you, Dardanian host,
      Mark with attention, and forgive my boast;
      Learn what I was, by what remains; and know
      From what impending fate you sav’d my foe.”
      Sternly he spoke, and then confronts the bull;
      And, on his ample forehead aiming full,
      The deadly stroke, descending, pierc’d the skull.
      Down drops the beast, nor needs a second wound,
      But sprawls in pangs of death, and spurns the ground.
      Then, thus: “In Dares’ stead I offer this.
      Eryx, accept a nobler sacrifice;
      Take the last gift my wither’d arms can yield:
      Thy gauntlets I resign, and here renounce the field.”

      This done, Aeneas orders, for the close,
      The strife of archers with contending bows.
      The mast Sergesthus’ shatter’d galley bore
      With his own hands he raises on the shore.
      A flutt’ring dove upon the top they tie,
      The living mark at which their arrows fly.
      The rival archers in a line advance,
      Their turn of shooting to receive from chance.
      A helmet holds their names; the lots are drawn:
      On the first scroll was read Hippocoon.
      The people shout. Upon the next was found
      Young Mnestheus, late with naval honours crown’d.
      The third contain’d Eurytion’s noble name,
      Thy brother, Pandarus, and next in fame,
      Whom Pallas urg’d the treaty to confound,
      And send among the Greeks a feather’d wound.
      Acestes in the bottom last remain’d,
      Whom not his age from youthful sports restrain’d.
      Soon all with vigour bend their trusty bows,
      And from the quiver each his arrow chose.
      Hippocoon’s was the first: with forceful sway
      It flew, and, whizzing, cut the liquid way.
      Fix’d in the mast the feather’d weapon stands:
      The fearful pigeon flutters in her bands,
      And the tree trembled, and the shouting cries
      Of the pleas’d people rend the vaulted skies.
      Then Mnestheus to the head his arrow drove,
      With lifted eyes, and took his aim above,
      But made a glancing shot, and missed the dove;
      Yet miss’d so narrow, that he cut the cord
      Which fasten’d by the foot the flitting bird.
      The captive thus releas’d, away she flies,
      And beats with clapping wings the yielding skies.
      His bow already bent, Eurytion stood;
      And, having first invok’d his brother god,
      His winged shaft with eager haste he sped.
      The fatal message reach’d her as she fled:
      She leaves her life aloft; she strikes the ground,
      And renders back the weapon in the wound.
      Acestes, grudging at his lot, remains,
      Without a prize to gratify his pains.
      Yet, shooting upward, sends his shaft, to show
      An archer’s art, and boast his twanging bow.
      The feather’d arrow gave a dire portent,
      And latter augurs judge from this event.
      Chaf’d by the speed, it fir’d; and, as it flew,
      A trail of following flames ascending drew:
      Kindling they mount, and mark the shiny way;
      Across the skies as falling meteors play,
      And vanish into wind, or in a blaze decay.
      The Trojans and Sicilians wildly stare,
      And, trembling, turn their wonder into pray’r.
      The Dardan prince put on a smiling face,
      And strain’d Acestes with a close embrace;
      Then, hon’ring him with gifts above the rest,
      Turn’d the bad omen, nor his fears confess’d.
      “The gods,” said he, “this miracle have wrought,
      And order’d you the prize without the lot.
      Accept this goblet, rough with figur’d gold,
      Which Thracian Cisseus gave my sire of old:
      This pledge of ancient amity receive,
      Which to my second sire I justly give.”
      He said, and, with the trumpets’ cheerful sound,
      Proclaim’d him victor, and with laurel-crown’d.
      Nor good Eurytion envied him the prize,
      Tho’ he transfix’d the pigeon in the skies.
      Who cut the line, with second gifts was grac’d;
      The third was his whose arrow pierc’d the mast.

      The chief, before the games were wholly done,
      Call’d Periphantes, tutor to his son,
      And whisper’d thus: “With speed Ascanius find;
      And, if his childish troop be ready join’d,
      On horseback let him grace his grandsire’s day,
      And lead his equals arm’d in just array.”
      He said; and, calling out, the cirque he clears.
      The crowd withdrawn, an open plain appears.
      And now the noble youths, of form divine,
      Advance before their fathers, in a line;
      The riders grace the steeds; the steeds with glory shine.

      Thus marching on in military pride,
      Shouts of applause resound from side to side.
      Their casques adorn’d with laurel wreaths they wear,
      Each brandishing aloft a cornel spear.
      Some at their backs their gilded quivers bore;
      Their chains of burnish’d gold hung down before.
      Three graceful troops they form’d upon the green;
      Three graceful leaders at their head were seen;
      Twelve follow’d ev’ry chief, and left a space between.
      The first young Priam led; a lovely boy,
      Whose grandsire was th’ unhappy king of Troy;
      His race in after times was known to fame,
      New honours adding to the Latian name;
      And well the royal boy his Thracian steed became.
      White were the fetlocks of his feet before,
      And on his front a snowy star he bore.
      Then beauteous Atys, with Iulus bred,
      Of equal age, the second squadron led.
      The last in order, but the first in place,
      First in the lovely features of his face,
      Rode fair Ascanius on a fiery steed,
      Queen Dido’s gift, and of the Tyrian breed.
      Sure coursers for the rest the king ordains,
      With golden bits adorn’d, and purple reins.

      The pleas’d spectators peals of shouts renew,
      And all the parents in the children view;
      Their make, their motions, and their sprightly grace,
      And hopes and fears alternate in their face.

      Th’ unfledg’d commanders and their martial train
      First make the circuit of the sandy plain
      Around their sires, and, at th’ appointed sign,
      Drawn up in beauteous order, form a line.
      The second signal sounds, the troop divides
      In three distinguish’d parts, with three distinguish’d guides
      Again they close, and once again disjoin;
      In troop to troop oppos’d, and line to line.
      They meet; they wheel; they throw their darts afar
      With harmless rage and well-dissembled war.
      Then in a round the mingled bodies run:
      Flying they follow, and pursuing shun;
      Broken, they break; and, rallying, they renew
      In other forms the military shew.
      At last, in order, undiscern’d they join,
      And march together in a friendly line.
      And, as the Cretan labyrinth of old,
      With wand’ring ways and many a winding fold,
      Involv’d the weary feet, without redress,
      In a round error, which denied recess;
      So fought the Trojan boys in warlike play,
      Turn’d and return’d, and still a diff’rent way.
      Thus dolphins in the deep each other chase
      In circles, when they swim around the wat’ry race.
      This game, these carousels, Ascanius taught;
      And, building Alba, to the Latins brought;
      Shew’d what he learn’d: the Latin sires impart
      To their succeeding sons the graceful art;
      From these imperial Rome receiv’d the game,
      Which Troy, the youths the Trojan troop, they name.

      Thus far the sacred sports they celebrate:
      But Fortune soon resum’d her ancient hate;
      For, while they pay the dead his annual dues,
      Those envied rites Saturnian Juno views;
      And sends the goddess of the various bow,
      To try new methods of revenge below;
      Supplies the winds to wing her airy way,
      Where in the port secure the navy lay.
      Swiftly fair Iris down her arch descends,
      And, undiscern’d, her fatal voyage ends.
      She saw the gath’ring crowd; and, gliding thence,
      The desert shore, and fleet without defence.
      The Trojan matrons, on the sands alone,
      With sighs and tears Anchises’ death bemoan;
      Then, turning to the sea their weeping eyes,
      Their pity to themselves renews their cries.
      “Alas!” said one, “what oceans yet remain
      For us to sail! what labours to sustain!”
      All take the word, and, with a gen’ral groan,
      Implore the gods for peace, and places of their own.

      The goddess, great in mischief, views their pains,
      And in a woman’s form her heav’nly limbs restrains.
      In face and shape old Beroe she became,
      Doryclus’ wife, a venerable dame,
      Once blest with riches, and a mother’s name.
      Thus chang’d, amidst the crying crowd she ran,
      Mix’d with the matrons, and these words began:
      “O wretched we, whom not the Grecian pow’r,
      Nor flames, destroy’d, in Troy’s unhappy hour!
      O wretched we, reserv’d by cruel fate,
      Beyond the ruins of the sinking state!
      Now sev’n revolving years are wholly run,
      Since this improsp’rous voyage we begun;
      Since, toss’d from shores to shores, from lands to lands,
      Inhospitable rocks and barren sands,
      Wand’ring in exile thro’ the stormy sea,
      We search in vain for flying Italy.
      Now cast by fortune on this kindred land,
      What should our rest and rising walls withstand,
      Or hinder here to fix our banish’d band?
      O country lost, and gods redeem’d in vain,
      If still in endless exile we remain!
      Shall we no more the Trojan walls renew,
      Or streams of some dissembled Simois view!
      Haste, join with me, th’ unhappy fleet consume!
      Cassandra bids; and I declare her doom.
      In sleep I saw her; she supplied my hands
      (For this I more than dreamt) with flaming brands:
      ‘With these,’ said she, ‘these wand’ring ships destroy:
      These are your fatal seats, and this your Troy.’
      Time calls you now; the precious hour employ:
      Slack not the good presage, while Heav’n inspires
      Our minds to dare, and gives the ready fires.
      See! Neptune’s altars minister their brands:
      The god is pleas’d; the god supplies our hands.”
      Then from the pile a flaming fire she drew,
      And, toss’d in air, amidst the galleys threw.

      Wrapp’d in amaze, the matrons wildly stare:
      Then Pyrgo, reverenc’d for her hoary hair,
      Pyrgo, the nurse of Priam’s num’rous race:
      “No Beroe this, tho’ she belies her face!
      What terrors from her frowning front arise!
      Behold a goddess in her ardent eyes!
      What rays around her heav’nly face are seen!
      Mark her majestic voice, and more than mortal mien!
      Beroe but now I left, whom, pin’d with pain,
      Her age and anguish from these rites detain,”
      She said. The matrons, seiz’d with new amaze,
      Roll their malignant eyes, and on the navy gaze.
      They fear, and hope, and neither part obey:
      They hope the fated land, but fear the fatal way.
      The goddess, having done her task below,
      Mounts up on equal wings, and bends her painted bow.
      Struck with the sight, and seiz’d with rage divine,
      The matrons prosecute their mad design:
      They shriek aloud; they snatch, with impious hands,
      The food of altars; fires and flaming brands.
      Green boughs and saplings, mingled in their haste,
      And smoking torches, on the ships they cast.
      The flame, unstopp’d at first, more fury gains,
      And Vulcan rides at large with loosen’d reins:
      Triumphant to the painted sterns he soars,
      And seizes, in this way, the banks and crackling oars.
      Eumelus was the first the news to bear,
      While yet they crowd the rural theatre.
      Then, what they hear, is witness’d by their eyes:
      A storm of sparkles and of flames arise.
      Ascanius took th’ alarm, while yet he led
      His early warriors on his prancing steed,
      And, spurring on, his equals soon o’erpass’d;
      Nor could his frighted friends reclaim his haste.
      Soon as the royal youth appear’d in view,
      He sent his voice before him as he flew:
      “What madness moves you, matrons, to destroy
      The last remainders of unhappy Troy!
      Not hostile fleets, but your own hopes, you burn,
      And on your friends your fatal fury turn.
      Behold your own Ascanius!” While he said,
      He drew his glitt’ring helmet from his head,
      In which the youths to sportful arms he led.
      By this, Aeneas and his train appear;
      And now the women, seiz’d with shame and fear,
      Dispers’d, to woods and caverns take their flight,
      Abhor their actions, and avoid the light;
      Their friends acknowledge, and their error find,
      And shake the goddess from their alter’d mind.

      Not so the raging fires their fury cease,
      But, lurking in the seams, with seeming peace,
      Work on their way amid the smould’ring tow,
      Sure in destruction, but in motion slow.
      The silent plague thro’ the green timber eats,
      And vomits out a tardy flame by fits.
      Down to the keels, and upward to the sails,
      The fire descends, or mounts, but still prevails;
      Nor buckets pour’d, nor strength of human hand,
      Can the victorious element withstand.

      The pious hero rends his robe, and throws
      To heav’n his hands, and with his hands his vows.
      “O Jove,” he cried, “if pray’rs can yet have place;
      If thou abhorr’st not all the Dardan race;
      If any spark of pity still remain;
      If gods are gods, and not invok’d in vain;
      Yet spare the relics of the Trojan train!
      Yet from the flames our burning vessels free,
      Or let thy fury fall alone on me!
      At this devoted head thy thunder throw,
      And send the willing sacrifice below!”

      Scarce had he said, when southern storms arise:
      From pole to pole the forky lightning flies;
      Loud rattling shakes the mountains and the plain;
      Heav’n bellies downward, and descends in rain.
      Whole sheets of water from the clouds are sent,
      Which, hissing thro’ the planks, the flames prevent,
      And stop the fiery pest. Four ships alone
      Burn to the waist, and for the fleet atone.

      But doubtful thoughts the hero’s heart divide;
      If he should still in Sicily reside,
      Forgetful of his fates, or tempt the main,
      In hope the promis’d Italy to gain.
      Then Nautes, old and wise, to whom alone
      The will of Heav’n by Pallas was foreshown;
      Vers’d in portents, experienc’d, and inspir’d
      To tell events, and what the fates requir’d;
      Thus while he stood, to neither part inclin’d,
      With cheerful words reliev’d his lab’ring mind:
      “O goddess-born, resign’d in ev’ry state,
      With patience bear, with prudence push your fate.
      By suff’ring well, our Fortune we subdue;
      Fly when she frowns, and, when she calls, pursue.
      Your friend Acestes is of Trojan kind;
      To him disclose the secrets of your mind:
      Trust in his hands your old and useless train;
      Too num’rous for the ships which yet remain:
      The feeble, old, indulgent of their ease,
      The dames who dread the dangers of the seas,
      With all the dastard crew, who dare not stand
      The shock of battle with your foes by land.
      Here you may build a common town for all,
      And, from Acestes’ name, Acesta call.”
      The reasons, with his friend’s experience join’d,
      Encourag’d much, but more disturb’d his mind.

      ’Twas dead of night; when to his slumb’ring eyes
      His father’s shade descended from the skies,
      And thus he spoke: “O more than vital breath,
      Lov’d while I liv’d, and dear ev’n after death;
      O son, in various toils and troubles toss’d,
      The King of Heav’n employs my careful ghost
      On his commands: the god, who sav’d from fire
      Your flaming fleet, and heard your just desire.
      The wholesome counsel of your friend receive,
      And here the coward train and woman leave:
      The chosen youth, and those who nobly dare,
      Transport, to tempt the dangers of the war.
      The stern Italians will their courage try;
      Rough are their manners, and their minds are high.
      But first to Pluto’s palace you shall go,
      And seek my shade among the blest below:
      For not with impious ghosts my soul remains,
      Nor suffers with the damn’d perpetual pains,
      But breathes the living air of soft Elysian plains.
      The chaste Sibylla shall your steps convey,
      And blood of offer’d victims free the way.
      There shall you know what realms the gods assign,
      And learn the fates and fortunes of your line.
      But now, farewell! I vanish with the night,
      And feel the blast of heav’n’s approaching light.”
      He said, and mix’d with shades, and took his airy flight.
      “Whither so fast?” the filial duty cried;
      “And why, ah why, the wish’d embrace denied?”

      He said, and rose; as holy zeal inspires,
      He rakes hot embers, and renews the fires;
      His country gods and Vesta then adores
      With cakes and incense, and their aid implores.
      Next, for his friends and royal host he sent,
      Reveal’d his vision, and the gods’ intent,
      With his own purpose. All, without delay,
      The will of Jove, and his desires obey.
      They list with women each degenerate name,
      Who dares not hazard life for future fame.
      These they cashier: the brave remaining few,
      Oars, banks, and cables, half consum’d, renew.
      The prince designs a city with the plow;
      The lots their sev’ral tenements allow.
      This part is nam’d from Ilium, that from Troy,
      And the new king ascends the throne with joy;
      A chosen senate from the people draws;
      Appoints the judges, and ordains the laws.
      Then, on the top of Eryx, they begin
      A rising temple to the Paphian queen.
      Anchises, last, is honour’d as a god;
      A priest is added, annual gifts bestow’d,
      And groves are planted round his blest abode.
      Nine days they pass in feasts, their temples crown’d;
      And fumes of incense in the fanes abound.
      Then from the south arose a gentle breeze
      That curl’d the smoothness of the glassy seas;
      The rising winds a ruffling gale afford,
      And call the merry mariners aboard.

      Now loud laments along the shores resound,
      Of parting friends in close embraces bound.
      The trembling women, the degenerate train,
      Who shunn’d the frightful dangers of the main,
      Ev’n those desire to sail, and take their share
      Of the rough passage and the promis’d war:
      Whom good Aeneas cheers, and recommends
      To their new master’s care his fearful friends.
      On Eryx’s altars three fat calves he lays;
      A lamb new-fallen to the stormy seas;
      Then slips his haulsers, and his anchors weighs.
      High on the deck the godlike hero stands,
      With olive crown’d, a charger in his hands;
      Then cast the reeking entrails in the brine,
      And pour’d the sacrifice of purple wine.
      Fresh gales arise; with equal strokes they vie,
      And brush the buxom seas, and o’er the billows fly.

      Meantime the mother goddess, full of fears,
      To Neptune thus address’d, with tender tears:
      “The pride of Jove’s imperious queen, the rage,
      The malice which no suff’rings can assuage,
      Compel me to these pray’rs; since neither fate,
      Nor time, nor pity, can remove her hate:
      Ev’n Jove is thwarted by his haughty wife;
      Still vanquish’d, yet she still renews the strife.
      As if ’twere little to consume the town
      Which aw’d the world, and wore th’ imperial crown,
      She prosecutes the ghost of Troy with pains,
      And gnaws, ev’n to the bones, the last remains.
      Let her the causes of her hatred tell;
      But you can witness its effects too well.
      You saw the storm she rais’d on Libyan floods,
      That mix’d the mounting billows with the clouds;
      When, bribing Aeolus, she shook the main,
      And mov’d rebellion in your wat’ry reign.
      With fury she possess’d the Dardan dames,
      To burn their fleet with execrable flames,
      And forc’d Aeneas, when his ships were lost,
      To leave his foll’wers on a foreign coast.
      For what remains, your godhead I implore,
      And trust my son to your protecting pow’r.
      If neither Jove’s nor Fate’s decree withstand,
      Secure his passage to the Latian land.”

      Then thus the mighty Ruler of the Main:
      “What may not Venus hope from Neptune’s reign?
      My kingdom claims your birth; my late defence
      Of your indanger’d fleet may claim your confidence.
      Nor less by land than sea my deeds declare
      How much your lov’d Aeneas is my care.
      Thee, Xanthus, and thee, Simois, I attest.
      Your Trojan troops when proud Achilles press’d,
      And drove before him headlong on the plain,
      And dash’d against the walls the trembling train;
      When floods were fill’d with bodies of the slain;
      When crimson Xanthus, doubtful of his way,
      Stood up on ridges to behold the sea;
      New heaps came tumbling in, and chok’d his way;
      When your Aeneas fought, but fought with odds
      Of force unequal, and unequal gods;
      I spread a cloud before the victor’s sight,
      Sustain’d the vanquish’d, and secur’d his flight;
      Ev’n then secur’d him, when I sought with joy
      The vow’d destruction of ungrateful Troy.
      My will’s the same: fair goddess, fear no more,
      Your fleet shall safely gain the Latian shore;
      Their lives are giv’n; one destin’d head alone
      Shall perish, and for multitudes atone.”
      Thus having arm’d with hopes her anxious mind,
      His finny team Saturnian Neptune join’d,
      Then adds the foamy bridle to their jaws,
      And to the loosen’d reins permits the laws.
      High on the waves his azure car he guides;
      Its axles thunder, and the sea subsides,
      And the smooth ocean rolls her silent tides.
      The tempests fly before their father’s face,
      Trains of inferior gods his triumph grace,
      And monster whales before their master play,
      And choirs of Tritons crowd the wat’ry way.
      The marshal’d pow’rs in equal troops divide
      To right and left; the gods his better side
      Inclose, and on the worse the Nymphs and Nereids ride.

      Now smiling hope, with sweet vicissitude,
      Within the hero’s mind his joys renew’d.
      He calls to raise the masts, the sheets display;
      The cheerful crew with diligence obey;
      They scud before the wind, and sail in open sea.
      Ahead of all the master pilot steers;
      And, as he leads, the following navy veers.
      The steeds of Night had travel’d half the sky,
      The drowsy rowers on their benches lie,
      When the soft God of Sleep, with easy flight,
      Descends, and draws behind a trail of light.
      Thou, Palinurus, art his destin’d prey;
      To thee alone he takes his fatal way.
      Dire dreams to thee, and iron sleep, he bears;
      And, lighting on thy prow, the form of Phorbas wears.
      Then thus the traitor god began his tale:
      “The winds, my friend, inspire a pleasing gale;
      The ships, without thy care, securely sail.
      Now steal an hour of sweet repose; and I
      Will take the rudder and thy room supply.”
      To whom the yawning pilot, half asleep:
      “Me dost thou bid to trust the treach’rous deep,
      The harlot smiles of her dissembling face,
      And to her faith commit the Trojan race?
      Shall I believe the Siren South again,
      And, oft betray’d, not know the monster main?”
      He said: his fasten’d hands the rudder keep,
      And, fix’d on heav’n, his eyes repel invading sleep.
      The god was wroth, and at his temples threw
      A branch in Lethe dipp’d, and drunk with Stygian dew:
      The pilot, vanquish’d by the pow’r divine,
      Soon clos’d his swimming eyes, and lay supine.
      Scarce were his limbs extended at their length,
      The god, insulting with superior strength,
      Fell heavy on him, plung’d him in the sea,
      And, with the stern, the rudder tore away.
      Headlong he fell, and, struggling in the main,
      Cried out for helping hands, but cried in vain.
      The victor daemon mounts obscure in air,
      While the ship sails without the pilot’s care.
      On Neptune’s faith the floating fleet relies;
      But what the man forsook, the god supplies,
      And o’er the dang’rous deep secure the navy flies;
      Glides by the Sirens’ cliffs, a shelfy coast,
      Long infamous for ships and sailors lost,
      And white with bones. Th’ impetuous ocean roars,
      And rocks rebellow from the sounding shores.
      The watchful hero felt the knocks, and found
      The tossing vessel sail’d on shoaly ground.
      Sure of his pilot’s loss, he takes himself
      The helm, and steers aloof, and shuns the shelf.
      Inly he griev’d, and, groaning from the breast,
      Deplor’d his death; and thus his pain express’d:
      “For faith repos’d on seas, and on the flatt’ring sky,
      Thy naked corpse is doom’d on shores unknown to lie.”





      He said, and wept; then spread his sails before
      The winds, and reach’d at length the Cumaean shore:
      Their anchors dropp’d, his crew the vessels moor.
      They turn their heads to sea, their sterns to land,
      And greet with greedy joy th’ Italian strand.
      Some strike from clashing flints their fiery seed;
      Some gather sticks, the kindled flames to feed,
      Or search for hollow trees, and fell the woods,
      Or trace thro’ valleys the discover’d floods.
      Thus, while their sev’ral charges they fulfil,
      The pious prince ascends the sacred hill
      Where Phoebus is ador’d; and seeks the shade
      Which hides from sight his venerable maid.
      Deep in a cave the Sibyl makes abode;
      Thence full of fate returns, and of the god.
      Thro’ Trivia’s grove they walk; and now behold,
      And enter now, the temple roof’d with gold.
      When Daedalus, to fly the Cretan shore,
      His heavy limbs on jointed pinions bore,
      (The first who sail’d in air,) ’tis sung by Fame,
      To the Cumaean coast at length he came,
      And here alighting, built this costly frame.
      Inscrib’d to Phoebus, here he hung on high
      The steerage of his wings, that cut the sky:
      Then o’er the lofty gate his art emboss’d
      Androgeos’ death, and off’rings to his ghost;
      Sev’n youths from Athens yearly sent, to meet
      The fate appointed by revengeful Crete.
      And next to those the dreadful urn was plac’d,
      In which the destin’d names by lots were cast:
      The mournful parents stand around in tears,
      And rising Crete against their shore appears.
      There too, in living sculpture, might be seen
      The mad affection of the Cretan queen;
      Then how she cheats her bellowing lover’s eye;
      The rushing leap, the doubtful progeny,
      The lower part a beast, a man above,
      The monument of their polluted love.
      Not far from thence he grav’d the wondrous maze,
      A thousand doors, a thousand winding ways:
      Here dwells the monster, hid from human view,
      Not to be found, but by the faithful clue;
      Till the kind artist, mov’d with pious grief,
      Lent to the loving maid this last relief,
      And all those erring paths describ’d so well
      That Theseus conquer’d and the monster fell.
      Here hapless Icarus had found his part,
      Had not the father’s grief restrain’d his art.
      He twice assay’d to cast his son in gold;
      Twice from his hands he dropp’d the forming mould.

      All this with wond’ring eyes Aeneas view’d;
      Each varying object his delight renew’d:
      Eager to read the rest, Achates came,
      And by his side the mad divining dame,
      The priestess of the god, Deiphobe her name.
      “Time suffers not,” she said, “to feed your eyes
      With empty pleasures; haste the sacrifice.
      Sev’n bullocks, yet unyok’d, for Phoebus choose,
      And for Diana sev’n unspotted ewes.”
      This said, the servants urge the sacred rites,
      While to the temple she the prince invites.
      A spacious cave, within its farmost part,
      Was hew’d and fashion’d by laborious art
      Thro’ the hill’s hollow sides: before the place,
      A hundred doors a hundred entries grace;
      As many voices issue, and the sound
      Of Sybil’s words as many times rebound.
      Now to the mouth they come. Aloud she cries:
      “This is the time; enquire your destinies.
      He comes; behold the god!” Thus while she said,
      (And shiv’ring at the sacred entry stay’d,)
      Her colour chang’d; her face was not the same,
      And hollow groans from her deep spirit came.
      Her hair stood up; convulsive rage possess’d
      Her trembling limbs, and heav’d her lab’ring breast.
      Greater than humankind she seem’d to look,
      And with an accent more than mortal spoke.
      Her staring eyes with sparkling fury roll;
      When all the god came rushing on her soul.
      Swiftly she turn’d, and, foaming as she spoke:
      “Why this delay?” she cried; “the pow’rs invoke!
      Thy pray’rs alone can open this abode;
      Else vain are my demands, and dumb the god.”

      She said no more. The trembling Trojans hear,
      O’erspread with a damp sweat and holy fear.
      The prince himself, with awful dread possess’d,
      His vows to great Apollo thus address’d:
      “Indulgent god, propitious pow’r to Troy,
      Swift to relieve, unwilling to destroy,
      Directed by whose hand the Dardan dart
      Pierc’d the proud Grecian’s only mortal part:
      Thus far, by fate’s decrees and thy commands,
      Thro’ ambient seas and thro’ devouring sands,
      Our exil’d crew has sought th’ Ausonian ground;
      And now, at length, the flying coast is found.
      Thus far the fate of Troy, from place to place,
      With fury has pursued her wand’ring race.
      Here cease, ye pow’rs, and let your vengeance end:
      Troy is no more, and can no more offend.
      And thou, O sacred maid, inspir’d to see
      Th’ event of things in dark futurity;
      Give me what Heav’n has promis’d to my fate,
      To conquer and command the Latian state;
      To fix my wand’ring gods, and find a place
      For the long exiles of the Trojan race.
      Then shall my grateful hands a temple rear
      To the twin gods, with vows and solemn pray’r;
      And annual rites, and festivals, and games,
      Shall be perform’d to their auspicious names.
      Nor shalt thou want thy honours in my land;
      For there thy faithful oracles shall stand,
      Preserv’d in shrines; and ev’ry sacred lay,
      Which, by thy mouth, Apollo shall convey:
      All shall be treasur’d by a chosen train
      Of holy priests, and ever shall remain.
      But O! commit not thy prophetic mind
      To flitting leaves, the sport of ev’ry wind,
      Lest they disperse in air our empty fate;
      Write not, but, what the pow’rs ordain, relate.”

      Struggling in vain, impatient of her load,
      And lab’ring underneath the pond’rous god,
      The more she strove to shake him from her breast,
      With more and far superior force he press’d;
      Commands his entrance, and, without control,
      Usurps her organs and inspires her soul.
      Now, with a furious blast, the hundred doors
      Ope of themselves; a rushing whirlwind roars
      Within the cave, and Sibyl’s voice restores:
      “Escap’d the dangers of the wat’ry reign,
      Yet more and greater ills by land remain.
      The coast, so long desir’d (nor doubt th’ event),
      Thy troops shall reach, but, having reach’d, repent.
      Wars, horrid wars, I view; a field of blood,
      And Tiber rolling with a purple flood.
      Simois nor Xanthus shall be wanting there:
      A new Achilles shall in arms appear,
      And he, too, goddess-born. Fierce Juno’s hate,
      Added to hostile force, shall urge thy fate.
      To what strange nations shalt not thou resort,
      Driv’n to solicit aid at ev’ry court!
      The cause the same which Ilium once oppress’d;
      A foreign mistress, and a foreign guest.
      But thou, secure of soul, unbent with woes,
      The more thy fortune frowns, the more oppose.
      The dawnings of thy safety shall be shown
      From whence thou least shalt hope, a Grecian town.”

      Thus, from the dark recess, the Sibyl spoke,
      And the resisting air the thunder broke;
      The cave rebellow’d, and the temple shook.
      Th’ ambiguous god, who rul’d her lab’ring breast,
      In these mysterious words his mind express’d;
      Some truths reveal’d, in terms involv’d the rest.
      At length her fury fell, her foaming ceas’d,
      And, ebbing in her soul, the god decreas’d.
      Then thus the chief: “No terror to my view,
      No frightful face of danger can be new.
      Inur’d to suffer, and resolv’d to dare,
      The Fates, without my pow’r, shall be without my care.
      This let me crave, since near your grove the road
      To hell lies open, and the dark abode
      Which Acheron surrounds, th’ innavigable flood;
      Conduct me thro’ the regions void of light,
      And lead me longing to my father’s sight.
      For him, a thousand dangers I have sought,
      And, rushing where the thickest Grecians fought,
      Safe on my back the sacred burthen brought.
      He, for my sake, the raging ocean tried,
      And wrath of Heav’n, my still auspicious guide,
      And bore beyond the strength decrepid age supplied.
      Oft, since he breath’d his last, in dead of night
      His reverend image stood before my sight;
      Enjoin’d to seek, below, his holy shade;
      Conducted there by your unerring aid.
      But you, if pious minds by pray’rs are won,
      Oblige the father, and protect the son.
      Yours is the pow’r; nor Proserpine in vain
      Has made you priestess of her nightly reign.
      If Orpheus, arm’d with his enchanting lyre,
      The ruthless king with pity could inspire,
      And from the shades below redeem his wife;
      If Pollux, off’ring his alternate life,
      Could free his brother, and can daily go
      By turns aloft, by turns descend below:
      Why name I Theseus, or his greater friend,
      Who trod the downward path, and upward could ascend?
      Not less than theirs from Jove my lineage came;
      My mother greater, my descent the same.”
      So pray’d the Trojan prince, and, while he pray’d,
      His hand upon the holy altar laid.

      Then thus replied the prophetess divine:
      “O goddess-born of great Anchises’ line,
      The gates of hell are open night and day;
      Smooth the descent, and easy is the way:
      But to return, and view the cheerful skies,
      In this the task and mighty labour lies.
      To few great Jupiter imparts this grace,
      And those of shining worth and heav’nly race.
      Betwixt those regions and our upper light,
      Deep forests and impenetrable night
      Possess the middle space: th’ infernal bounds
      Cocytus, with his sable waves, surrounds.
      But if so dire a love your soul invades,
      As twice below to view the trembling shades;
      If you so hard a toil will undertake,
      As twice to pass th’ innavigable lake;
      Receive my counsel. In the neighb’ring grove
      There stands a tree; the queen of Stygian Jove
      Claims it her own; thick woods and gloomy night
      Conceal the happy plant from human sight.
      One bough it bears; but wondrous to behold!
      The ductile rind and leaves of radiant gold:
      This from the vulgar branches must be torn,
      And to fair Proserpine the present borne,
      Ere leave be giv’n to tempt the nether skies.
      The first thus rent a second will arise,
      And the same metal the same room supplies.
      Look round the wood, with lifted eyes, to see
      The lurking gold upon the fatal tree:
      Then rend it off, as holy rites command;
      The willing metal will obey thy hand,
      Following with ease, if favour’d by thy fate,
      Thou art foredoom’d to view the Stygian state:
      If not, no labour can the tree constrain;
      And strength of stubborn arms and steel are vain.
      Besides, you know not, while you here attend,
      Th’ unworthy fate of your unhappy friend:
      Breathless he lies; and his unburied ghost,
      Depriv’d of fun’ral rites, pollutes your host.
      Pay first his pious dues; and, for the dead,
      Two sable sheep around his hearse be led;
      Then, living turfs upon his body lay:
      This done, securely take the destin’d way,
      To find the regions destitute of day.”

      She said, and held her peace. Aeneas went
      Sad from the cave, and full of discontent,
      Unknowing whom the sacred Sibyl meant.
      Achates, the companion of his breast,
      Goes grieving by his side, with equal cares oppress’d.
      Walking, they talk’d, and fruitlessly divin’d
      What friend the priestess by those words design’d.
      But soon they found an object to deplore:
      Misenus lay extended on the shore;
      Son of the God of Winds: none so renown’d
      The warrior trumpet in the field to sound;
      With breathing brass to kindle fierce alarms,
      And rouse to dare their fate in honourable arms.
      He serv’d great Hector, and was ever near,
      Not with his trumpet only, but his spear.
      But by Pelides’ arms when Hector fell,
      He chose Aeneas; and he chose as well.
      Swoln with applause, and aiming still at more,
      He now provokes the sea gods from the shore;
      With envy Triton heard the martial sound,
      And the bold champion, for his challenge, drown’d;
      Then cast his mangled carcass on the strand:
      The gazing crowd around the body stand.
      All weep; but most Aeneas mourns his fate,
      And hastens to perform the funeral state.
      In altar-wise, a stately pile they rear;
      The basis broad below, and top advanc’d in air.
      An ancient wood, fit for the work design’d,
      (The shady covert of the salvage kind,)
      The Trojans found: the sounding ax is plied;
      Firs, pines, and pitch trees, and the tow’ring pride
      Of forest ashes, feel the fatal stroke,
      And piercing wedges cleave the stubborn oak.
      Huge trunks of trees, fell’d from the steepy crown
      Of the bare mountains, roll with ruin down.
      Arm’d like the rest the Trojan prince appears,
      And by his pious labour urges theirs.

      Thus while he wrought, revolving in his mind
      The ways to compass what his wish design’d,
      He cast his eyes upon the gloomy grove,
      And then with vows implor’d the Queen of Love:
      “O may thy pow’r, propitious still to me,
      Conduct my steps to find the fatal tree,
      In this deep forest; since the Sibyl’s breath
      Foretold, alas! too true, Misenus’ death.”
      Scarce had he said, when, full before his sight,
      Two doves, descending from their airy flight,
      Secure upon the grassy plain alight.
      He knew his mother’s birds; and thus he pray’d:
      “Be you my guides, with your auspicious aid,
      And lead my footsteps, till the branch be found,
      Whose glitt’ring shadow gilds the sacred ground.
      And thou, great parent, with celestial care,
      In this distress be present to my pray’r!”
      Thus having said, he stopp’d with watchful sight,
      Observing still the motions of their flight,
      What course they took, what happy signs they shew.
      They fed, and, flutt’ring, by degrees withdrew
      Still farther from the place, but still in view:
      Hopping and flying, thus they led him on
      To the slow lake, whose baleful stench to shun
      They wing’d their flight aloft; then, stooping low,
      Perch’d on the double tree that bears the golden bough.
      Thro’ the green leafs the glitt’ring shadows glow;
      As, on the sacred oak, the wintry mistletoe,
      Where the proud mother views her precious brood,
      And happier branches, which she never sow’d.
      Such was the glitt’ring; such the ruddy rind,
      And dancing leaves, that wanton’d in the wind.
      He seiz’d the shining bough with griping hold,
      And rent away, with ease, the ling’ring gold;
      Then to the Sibyl’s palace bore the prize.
      Meantime the Trojan troops, with weeping eyes,
      To dead Misenus pay his obsequies.
      First, from the ground a lofty pile they rear,
      Of pitch trees, oaks, and pines, and unctuous fir:
      The fabric’s front with cypress twigs they strew,
      And stick the sides with boughs of baleful yew.
      The topmost part his glitt’ring arms adorn;
      Warm waters, then, in brazen caldrons borne,
      Are pour’d to wash his body, joint by joint,
      And fragrant oils the stiffen’d limbs anoint.
      With groans and cries Misenus they deplore:
      Then on a bier, with purple cover’d o’er,
      The breathless body, thus bewail’d, they lay,
      And fire the pile, their faces turn’d away:
      Such reverend rites their fathers us’d to pay.
      Pure oil and incense on the fire they throw,
      And fat of victims, which his friends bestow.
      These gifts the greedy flames to dust devour;
      Then on the living coals red wine they pour;
      And, last, the relics by themselves dispose,
      Which in a brazen urn the priests inclose.
      Old Corynaeus compass’d thrice the crew,
      And dipp’d an olive branch in holy dew;
      Which thrice he sprinkled round, and thrice aloud
      Invok’d the dead, and then dismissed the crowd.
      But good Aeneas order’d on the shore
      A stately tomb, whose top a trumpet bore,
      A soldier’s falchion, and a seaman’s oar.
      Thus was his friend interr’d; and deathless fame
      Still to the lofty cape consigns his name.
      These rites perform’d, the prince, without delay,
      Hastes to the nether world his destin’d way.
      Deep was the cave; and, downward as it went
      From the wide mouth, a rocky rough descent;
      And here th’ access a gloomy grove defends,
      And there th’ unnavigable lake extends,
      O’er whose unhappy waters, void of light,
      No bird presumes to steer his airy flight;
      Such deadly stenches from the depths arise,
      And steaming sulphur, that infects the skies.
      From hence the Grecian bards their legends make,
      And give the name Avernus to the lake.
      Four sable bullocks, in the yoke untaught,
      For sacrifice the pious hero brought.
      The priestess pours the wine betwixt their horns;
      Then cuts the curling hair; that first oblation burns,
      Invoking Hecate hither to repair:
      A pow’rful name in hell and upper air.
      The sacred priests with ready knives bereave
      The beasts of life, and in full bowls receive
      The streaming blood: a lamb to Hell and Night
      (The sable wool without a streak of white)
      Aeneas offers; and, by fate’s decree,
      A barren heifer, Proserpine, to thee,
      With holocausts he Pluto’s altar fills;
      Sev’n brawny bulls with his own hand he kills;
      Then on the broiling entrails oil he pours;
      Which, ointed thus, the raging flame devours.
      Late the nocturnal sacrifice begun,
      Nor ended till the next returning sun.
      Then earth began to bellow, trees to dance,
      And howling dogs in glimm’ring light advance,
      Ere Hecate came. “Far hence be souls profane!”
      The Sibyl cried, “and from the grove abstain!
      Now, Trojan, take the way thy fates afford;
      Assume thy courage, and unsheathe thy sword.”
      She said, and pass’d along the gloomy space;
      The prince pursued her steps with equal pace.

      Ye realms, yet unreveal’d to human sight,
      Ye gods who rule the regions of the night,
      Ye gliding ghosts, permit me to relate
      The mystic wonders of your silent state!

      Obscure they went thro’ dreary shades, that led
      Along the waste dominions of the dead.
      Thus wander travelers in woods by night,
      By the moon’s doubtful and malignant light,
      When Jove in dusky clouds involves the skies,
      And the faint crescent shoots by fits before their eyes.

      Just in the gate and in the jaws of hell,
      Revengeful Cares and sullen Sorrows dwell,
      And pale Diseases, and repining Age,
      Want, Fear, and Famine’s unresisted rage;
      Here Toils, and Death, and Death’s half-brother, Sleep,
      Forms terrible to view, their sentry keep;
      With anxious Pleasures of a guilty mind,
      Deep Frauds before, and open Force behind;
      The Furies’ iron beds; and Strife, that shakes
      Her hissing tresses and unfolds her snakes.
      Full in the midst of this infernal road,
      An elm displays her dusky arms abroad:
      The God of Sleep there hides his heavy head,
      And empty dreams on ev’ry leaf are spread.
      Of various forms unnumber’d spectres more,
      Centaurs, and double shapes, besiege the door.
      Before the passage, horrid Hydra stands,
      And Briareus with all his hundred hands;
      Gorgons, Geryon with his triple frame;
      And vain Chimaera vomits empty flame.
      The chief unsheath’d his shining steel, prepar’d,
      Tho’ seiz’d with sudden fear, to force the guard,
      Off’ring his brandish’d weapon at their face;
      Had not the Sibyl stopp’d his eager pace,
      And told him what those empty phantoms were:
      Forms without bodies, and impassive air.
      Hence to deep Acheron they take their way,
      Whose troubled eddies, thick with ooze and clay,
      Are whirl’d aloft, and in Cocytus lost.
      There Charon stands, who rules the dreary coast:
      A sordid god: down from his hoary chin
      A length of beard descends, uncomb’d, unclean;
      His eyes, like hollow furnaces on fire;
      A girdle, foul with grease, binds his obscene attire.
      He spreads his canvas; with his pole he steers;
      The freights of flitting ghosts in his thin bottom bears.
      He look’d in years; yet in his years were seen
      A youthful vigour and autumnal green.
      An airy crowd came rushing where he stood,
      Which fill’d the margin of the fatal flood:
      Husbands and wives, boys and unmarried maids,
      And mighty heroes’ more majestic shades,
      And youths, intomb’d before their fathers’ eyes,
      With hollow groans, and shrieks, and feeble cries.
      Thick as the leaves in autumn strow the woods,
      Or fowls, by winter forc’d, forsake the floods,
      And wing their hasty flight to happier lands;
      Such, and so thick, the shiv’ring army stands,
      And press for passage with extended hands.
      Now these, now those, the surly boatman bore:
      The rest he drove to distance from the shore.
      The hero, who beheld with wond’ring eyes
      The tumult mix’d with shrieks, laments, and cries,
      Ask’d of his guide, what the rude concourse meant;
      Why to the shore the thronging people bent;
      What forms of law among the ghosts were us’d;
      Why some were ferried o’er, and some refus’d.

      “Son of Anchises, offspring of the gods,”
      The Sibyl said, “you see the Stygian floods,
      The sacred stream which heav’n’s imperial state
      Attests in oaths, and fears to violate.
      The ghosts rejected are th’ unhappy crew
      Depriv’d of sepulchers and fun’ral due:
      The boatman, Charon; those, the buried host,
      He ferries over to the farther coast;
      Nor dares his transport vessel cross the waves
      With such whose bones are not compos’d in graves.
      A hundred years they wander on the shore;
      At length, their penance done, are wafted o’er.”
      The Trojan chief his forward pace repress’d,
      Revolving anxious thoughts within his breast,
      He saw his friends, who, whelm’d beneath the waves,
      Their fun’ral honours claim’d, and ask’d their quiet graves.
      The lost Leucaspis in the crowd he knew,
      And the brave leader of the Lycian crew,
      Whom, on the Tyrrhene seas, the tempests met;
      The sailors master’d, and the ship o’erset.

      Amidst the spirits, Palinurus press’d,
      Yet fresh from life, a new-admitted guest,
      Who, while he steering view’d the stars, and bore
      His course from Afric to the Latian shore,
      Fell headlong down. The Trojan fix’d his view,
      And scarcely thro’ the gloom the sullen shadow knew.
      Then thus the prince: “What envious pow’r, O friend,
      Brought your lov’d life to this disastrous end?
      For Phoebus, ever true in all he said,
      Has in your fate alone my faith betray’d.
      The god foretold you should not die, before
      You reach’d, secure from seas, th’ Italian shore.
      Is this th’ unerring pow’r?” The ghost replied;
      “Nor Phoebus flatter’d, nor his answers lied;
      Nor envious gods have sent me to the deep:
      But, while the stars and course of heav’n I keep,
      My wearied eyes were seiz’d with fatal sleep.
      I fell; and, with my weight, the helm constrain’d
      Was drawn along, which yet my gripe retain’d.
      Now by the winds and raging waves I swear,
      Your safety, more than mine, was then my care;
      Lest, of the guide bereft, the rudder lost,
      Your ship should run against the rocky coast.
      Three blust’ring nights, borne by the southern blast,
      I floated, and discover’d land at last:
      High on a mounting wave my head I bore,
      Forcing my strength, and gath’ring to the shore.
      Panting, but past the danger, now I seiz’d
      The craggy cliffs, and my tir’d members eas’d.
      While, cumber’d with my dropping clothes, I lay,
      The cruel nation, covetous of prey,
      Stain’d with my blood th’ unhospitable coast;
      And now, by winds and waves, my lifeless limbs are toss’d:
      Which O avert, by yon ethereal light,
      Which I have lost for this eternal night!
      Or, if by dearer ties you may be won,
      By your dead sire, and by your living son,
      Redeem from this reproach my wand’ring ghost;
      Or with your navy seek the Velin coast,
      And in a peaceful grave my corpse compose;
      Or, if a nearer way your mother shows,
      Without whose aid you durst not undertake
      This frightful passage o’er the Stygian lake,
      Lend to this wretch your hand, and waft him o’er
      To the sweet banks of yon forbidden shore.”
      Scarce had he said, the prophetess began:
      “What hopes delude thee, miserable man?
      Think’st thou, thus unintomb’d, to cross the floods,
      To view the Furies and infernal gods,
      And visit, without leave, the dark abodes?
      Attend the term of long revolving years;
      Fate, and the dooming gods, are deaf to tears.
      This comfort of thy dire misfortune take:
      The wrath of Heav’n, inflicted for thy sake,
      With vengeance shall pursue th’ inhuman coast,
      Till they propitiate thy offended ghost,
      And raise a tomb, with vows and solemn pray’r;
      And Palinurus’ name the place shall bear.”
      This calm’d his cares; sooth’d with his future fame,
      And pleas’d to hear his propagated name.

      Now nearer to the Stygian lake they draw:
      Whom, from the shore, the surly boatman saw;
      Observ’d their passage thro’ the shady wood,
      And mark’d their near approaches to the flood.
      Then thus he call’d aloud, inflam’d with wrath:
      “Mortal, whate’er, who this forbidden path
      In arms presum’st to tread, I charge thee, stand,
      And tell thy name, and bus’ness in the land.
      Know this, the realm of night; the Stygian shore:
      My boat conveys no living bodies o’er;
      Nor was I pleas’d great Theseus once to bear,
      Who forc’d a passage with his pointed spear,
      Nor strong Alcides, men of mighty fame,
      And from th’ immortal gods their lineage came.
      In fetters one the barking porter tied,
      And took him trembling from his sov’reign’s side:
      Two sought by force to seize his beauteous bride.”
      To whom the Sibyl thus: “Compose thy mind;
      Nor frauds are here contriv’d, nor force design’d.
      Still may the dog the wand’ring troops constrain
      Of airy ghosts, and vex the guilty train,
      And with her grisly lord his lovely queen remain.
      The Trojan chief, whose lineage is from Jove,
      Much fam’d for arms, and more for filial love,
      Is sent to seek his sire in your Elysian grove.
      If neither piety, nor Heav’n’s command,
      Can gain his passage to the Stygian strand,
      This fatal present shall prevail at least.”
      Then shew’d the shining bough, conceal’d within her vest.
      No more was needful: for the gloomy god
      Stood mute with awe, to see the golden rod;
      Admir’d the destin’d off’ring to his queen;
      A venerable gift, so rarely seen.
      His fury thus appeas’d, he puts to land;
      The ghosts forsake their seats at his command:
      He clears the deck, receives the mighty freight;
      The leaky vessel groans beneath the weight.
      Slowly she sails, and scarcely stems the tides;
      The pressing water pours within her sides.
      His passengers at length are wafted o’er,
      Expos’d, in muddy weeds, upon the miry shore.

      No sooner landed, in his den they found
      The triple porter of the Stygian sound,
      Grim Cerberus, who soon began to rear
      His crested snakes, and arm’d his bristling hair.
      The prudent Sibyl had before prepar’d
      A sop, in honey steep’d, to charm the guard;
      Which, mix’d with pow’rful drugs, she cast before
      His greedy grinning jaws, just op’d to roar.
      With three enormous mouths he gapes; and straight,
      With hunger press’d, devours the pleasing bait.
      Long draughts of sleep his monstrous limbs enslave;
      He reels, and, falling, fills the spacious cave.
      The keeper charm’d, the chief without delay
      Pass’d on, and took th’ irremeable way.
      Before the gates, the cries of babes new born,
      Whom fate had from their tender mothers torn,
      Assault his ears: then those, whom form of laws
      Condemn’d to die, when traitors judg’d their cause.
      Nor want they lots, nor judges to review
      The wrongful sentence, and award a new.
      Minos, the strict inquisitor, appears;
      And lives and crimes, with his assessors, hears.
      Round in his urn the blended balls he rolls,
      Absolves the just, and dooms the guilty souls.
      The next, in place and punishment, are they
      Who prodigally throw their souls away;
      Fools, who, repining at their wretched state,
      And loathing anxious life, suborn’d their fate.
      With late repentance now they would retrieve
      The bodies they forsook, and wish to live;
      Their pains and poverty desire to bear,
      To view the light of heav’n, and breathe the vital air:
      But fate forbids; the Stygian floods oppose,
      And with circling streams the captive souls inclose.

      Not far from thence, the Mournful Fields appear
      So call’d from lovers that inhabit there.
      The souls whom that unhappy flame invades,
      In secret solitude and myrtle shades
      Make endless moans, and, pining with desire,
      Lament too late their unextinguish’d fire.
      Here Procris, Eriphyle here he found,
      Baring her breast, yet bleeding with the wound
      Made by her son. He saw Pasiphae there,
      With Phaedra’s ghost, a foul incestuous pair.
      There Laodamia, with Evadne, moves,
      Unhappy both, but loyal in their loves:
      Caeneus, a woman once, and once a man,
      But ending in the sex she first began.
      Not far from these Phoenician Dido stood,
      Fresh from her wound, her bosom bath’d in blood;
      Whom when the Trojan hero hardly knew,
      Obscure in shades, and with a doubtful view,
      (Doubtful as he who sees, thro’ dusky night,
      Or thinks he sees, the moon’s uncertain light,)
      With tears he first approach’d the sullen shade;
      And, as his love inspir’d him, thus he said:
      “Unhappy queen! then is the common breath
      Of rumour true, in your reported death,
      And I, alas! the cause? By Heav’n, I vow,
      And all the pow’rs that rule the realms below,
      Unwilling I forsook your friendly state,
      Commanded by the gods, and forc’d by fate.
      Those gods, that fate, whose unresisted might
      Have sent me to these regions void of light,
      Thro’ the vast empire of eternal night.
      Nor dar’d I to presume, that, press’d with grief,
      My flight should urge you to this dire relief.
      Stay, stay your steps, and listen to my vows:
      ’Tis the last interview that fate allows!”
      In vain he thus attempts her mind to move
      With tears, and pray’rs, and late-repenting love.
      Disdainfully she look’d; then turning round,
      But fix’d her eyes unmov’d upon the ground,
      And what he says and swears, regards no more
      Than the deaf rocks, when the loud billows roar;
      But whirl’d away, to shun his hateful sight,
      Hid in the forest and the shades of night;
      Then sought Sichaeus thro’ the shady grove,
      Who answer’d all her cares, and equal’d all her love.

      Some pious tears the pitying hero paid,
      And follow’d with his eyes the flitting shade,
      Then took the forward way, by fate ordain’d,
      And, with his guide, the farther fields attain’d,
      Where, sever’d from the rest, the warrior souls remain’d.
      Tydeus he met, with Meleager’s race,
      The pride of armies, and the soldiers’ grace;
      And pale Adrastus with his ghastly face.
      Of Trojan chiefs he view’d a num’rous train,
      All much lamented, all in battle slain;
      Glaucus and Medon, high above the rest,
      Antenor’s sons, and Ceres’ sacred priest.
      And proud Idaeus, Priam’s charioteer,
      Who shakes his empty reins, and aims his airy spear.
      The gladsome ghosts, in circling troops, attend
      And with unwearied eyes behold their friend;
      Delight to hover near, and long to know
      What bus’ness brought him to the realms below.
      But Argive chiefs, and Agamemnon’s train,
      When his refulgent arms flash’d thro’ the shady plain,
      Fled from his well-known face, with wonted fear,
      As when his thund’ring sword and pointed spear
      Drove headlong to their ships, and glean’d the routed rear.
      They rais’d a feeble cry, with trembling notes;
      But the weak voice deceiv’d their gasping throats.

      Here Priam’s son, Deiphobus, he found,
      Whose face and limbs were one continued wound:
      Dishonest, with lopp’d arms, the youth appears,
      Spoil’d of his nose, and shorten’d of his ears.
      He scarcely knew him, striving to disown
      His blotted form, and blushing to be known;
      And therefore first began: “O Teucer’s race,
      Who durst thy faultless figure thus deface?
      What heart could wish, what hand inflict, this dire disgrace?
      ’Twas fam’d, that in our last and fatal night
      Your single prowess long sustain’d the fight,
      Till tir’d, not forc’d, a glorious fate you chose,
      And fell upon a heap of slaughter’d foes.
      But, in remembrance of so brave a deed,
      A tomb and fun’ral honours I decreed;
      Thrice call’d your manes on the Trojan plains:
      The place your armour and your name retains.
      Your body too I sought, and, had I found,
      Design’d for burial in your native ground.”

      The ghost replied: “Your piety has paid
      All needful rites, to rest my wand’ring shade;
      But cruel fate, and my more cruel wife,
      To Grecian swords betray’d my sleeping life.
      These are the monuments of Helen’s love:
      The shame I bear below, the marks I bore above.
      You know in what deluding joys we pass’d
      The night that was by Heav’n decreed our last:
      For, when the fatal horse, descending down,
      Pregnant with arms, o’erwhelm’d th’ unhappy town
      She feign’d nocturnal orgies; left my bed,
      And, mix’d with Trojan dames, the dances led
      Then, waving high her torch, the signal made,
      Which rous’d the Grecians from their ambuscade.
      With watching overworn, with cares oppress’d,
      Unhappy I had laid me down to rest,
      And heavy sleep my weary limbs possess’d.
      Meantime my worthy wife our arms mislaid,
      And from beneath my head my sword convey’d;
      The door unlatch’d, and, with repeated calls,
      Invites her former lord within my walls.
      Thus in her crime her confidence she plac’d,
      And with new treasons would redeem the past.
      What need I more? Into the room they ran,
      And meanly murder’d a defenceless man.
      Ulysses, basely born, first led the way.
      Avenging pow’rs! with justice if I pray,
      That fortune be their own another day!
      But answer you; and in your turn relate,
      What brought you, living, to the Stygian state:
      Driv’n by the winds and errors of the sea,
      Or did you Heav’n’s superior doom obey?
      Or tell what other chance conducts your way,
      To view with mortal eyes our dark retreats,
      Tumults and torments of th’ infernal seats.”

      While thus in talk the flying hours they pass,
      The sun had finish’d more than half his race:
      And they, perhaps, in words and tears had spent
      The little time of stay which Heav’n had lent;
      But thus the Sibyl chides their long delay:
      “Night rushes down, and headlong drives the day:
      ’Tis here, in different paths, the way divides;
      The right to Pluto’s golden palace guides;
      The left to that unhappy region tends,
      Which to the depth of Tartarus descends;
      The seat of night profound, and punish’d fiends.”
      Then thus Deiphobus: “O sacred maid,
      Forbear to chide, and be your will obey’d!
      Lo! to the secret shadows I retire,
      To pay my penance till my years expire.
      Proceed, auspicious prince, with glory crown’d,
      And born to better fates than I have found.”
      He said; and, while he said, his steps he turn’d
      To secret shadows, and in silence mourn’d.

      The hero, looking on the left, espied
      A lofty tow’r, and strong on ev’ry side
      With treble walls, which Phlegethon surrounds,
      Whose fiery flood the burning empire bounds;
      And, press’d betwixt the rocks, the bellowing noise resounds
      Wide is the fronting gate, and, rais’d on high
      With adamantine columns, threats the sky.
      Vain is the force of man, and Heav’n’s as vain,
      To crush the pillars which the pile sustain.
      Sublime on these a tow’r of steel is rear’d;
      And dire Tisiphone there keeps the ward,
      Girt in her sanguine gown, by night and day,
      Observant of the souls that pass the downward way.
      From hence are heard the groans of ghosts, the pains
      Of sounding lashes and of dragging chains.
      The Trojan stood astonish’d at their cries,
      And ask’d his guide from whence those yells arise;
      And what the crimes, and what the tortures were,
      And loud laments that rent the liquid air.

      She thus replied: “The chaste and holy race
      Are all forbidden this polluted place.
      But Hecate, when she gave to rule the woods,
      Then led me trembling thro’ these dire abodes,
      And taught the tortures of th’ avenging gods.
      These are the realms of unrelenting fate;
      And awful Rhadamanthus rules the state.
      He hears and judges each committed crime;
      Enquires into the manner, place, and time.
      The conscious wretch must all his acts reveal,
      Loth to confess, unable to conceal,
      From the first moment of his vital breath,
      To his last hour of unrepenting death.
      Straight, o’er the guilty ghost, the Fury shakes
      The sounding whip and brandishes her snakes,
      And the pale sinner, with her sisters, takes.
      Then, of itself, unfolds th’ eternal door;
      With dreadful sounds the brazen hinges roar.
      You see, before the gate, what stalking ghost
      Commands the guard, what sentries keep the post.
      More formidable Hydra stands within,
      Whose jaws with iron teeth severely grin.
      The gaping gulf low to the centre lies,
      And twice as deep as earth is distant from the skies.
      The rivals of the gods, the Titan race,
      Here, sing’d with lightning, roll within th’ unfathom’d space.
      Here lie th’ Alaean twins, (I saw them both,)
      Enormous bodies, of gigantic growth,
      Who dar’d in fight the Thund’rer to defy,
      Affect his heav’n, and force him from the sky.
      Salmoneus, suff’ring cruel pains, I found,
      For emulating Jove; the rattling sound
      Of mimic thunder, and the glitt’ring blaze
      Of pointed lightnings, and their forky rays.
      Thro’ Elis and the Grecian towns he flew;
      Th’ audacious wretch four fiery coursers drew:
      He wav’d a torch aloft, and, madly vain,
      Sought godlike worship from a servile train.
      Ambitious fool! with horny hoofs to pass
      O’er hollow arches of resounding brass,
      To rival thunder in its rapid course,
      And imitate inimitable force!
      But he, the King of Heav’n, obscure on high,
      Bar’d his red arm, and, launching from the sky
      His writhen bolt, not shaking empty smoke,
      Down to the deep abyss the flaming felon strook.
      There Tityus was to see, who took his birth
      From heav’n, his nursing from the foodful earth.
      Here his gigantic limbs, with large embrace,
      Infold nine acres of infernal space.
      A rav’nous vulture, in his open’d side,
      Her crooked beak and cruel talons tried;
      Still for the growing liver digg’d his breast;
      The growing liver still supplied the feast;
      Still are his entrails fruitful to their pains:
      Th’ immortal hunger lasts, th’ immortal food remains.
      Ixion and Perithous I could name,
      And more Thessalian chiefs of mighty fame.
      High o’er their heads a mould’ring rock is plac’d,
      That promises a fall, and shakes at ev’ry blast.
      They lie below, on golden beds display’d;
      And genial feasts with regal pomp are made.
      The Queen of Furies by their sides is set,
      And snatches from their mouths th’ untasted meat,
      Which if they touch, her hissing snakes she rears,
      Tossing her torch, and thund’ring in their ears.
      Then they, who brothers’ better claim disown,
      Expel their parents, and usurp the throne;
      Defraud their clients, and, to lucre sold,
      Sit brooding on unprofitable gold;
      Who dare not give, and ev’n refuse to lend
      To their poor kindred, or a wanting friend.
      Vast is the throng of these; nor less the train
      Of lustful youths, for foul adult’ry slain:
      Hosts of deserters, who their honour sold,
      And basely broke their faith for bribes of gold.
      All these within the dungeon’s depth remain,
      Despairing pardon, and expecting pain.
      Ask not what pains; nor farther seek to know
      Their process, or the forms of law below.
      Some roll a weighty stone; some, laid along,
      And bound with burning wires, on spokes of wheels are hung
      Unhappy Theseus, doom’d for ever there,
      Is fix’d by fate on his eternal chair;
      And wretched Phlegyas warns the world with cries
      (Could warning make the world more just or wise):
      ‘Learn righteousness, and dread th’ avenging deities.’
      To tyrants others have their country sold,
      Imposing foreign lords, for foreign gold;
      Some have old laws repeal’d, new statutes made,
      Not as the people pleas’d, but as they paid;
      With incest some their daughters’ bed profan’d:
      All dar’d the worst of ills, and, what they dar’d, attain’d.
      Had I a hundred mouths, a hundred tongues,
      And throats of brass, inspir’d with iron lungs,
      I could not half those horrid crimes repeat,
      Nor half the punishments those crimes have met.
      But let us haste our voyage to pursue:
      The walls of Pluto’s palace are in view;
      The gate, and iron arch above it, stands
      On anvils labour’d by the Cyclops’ hands.
      Before our farther way the Fates allow,
      Here must we fix on high the golden bough.”

      She said, and thro’ the gloomy shades they pass’d,
      And chose the middle path. Arriv’d at last,
      The prince with living water sprinkled o’er
      His limbs and body; then approach’d the door,
      Possess’d the porch, and on the front above
      He fix’d the fatal bough requir’d by Pluto’s love.
      These holy rites perform’d, they took their way
      Where long extended plains of pleasure lay:
      The verdant fields with those of heav’n may vie,
      With ether vested, and a purple sky;
      The blissful seats of happy souls below.
      Stars of their own, and their own suns, they know;
      Their airy limbs in sports they exercise,
      And on the green contend the wrestler’s prize.
      Some in heroic verse divinely sing;
      Others in artful measures led the ring.
      The Thracian bard, surrounded by the rest,
      There stands conspicuous in his flowing vest;
      His flying fingers, and harmonious quill,
      Strikes sev’n distinguish’d notes, and sev’n at once they fill.
      Here found they Teucer’s old heroic race,
      Born better times and happier years to grace.
      Assaracus and Ilus here enjoy
      Perpetual fame, with him who founded Troy.
      The chief beheld their chariots from afar,
      Their shining arms, and coursers train’d to war:
      Their lances fix’d in earth, their steeds around,
      Free from their harness, graze the flow’ry ground.
      The love of horses which they had, alive,
      And care of chariots, after death survive.
      Some cheerful souls were feasting on the plain;
      Some did the song, and some the choir maintain,
      Beneath a laurel shade, where mighty Po
      Mounts up to woods above, and hides his head below.
      Here patriots live, who, for their country’s good,
      In fighting fields, were prodigal of blood:
      Priests of unblemish’d lives here make abode,
      And poets worthy their inspiring god;
      And searching wits, of more mechanic parts,
      Who grac’d their age with new-invented arts:
      Those who to worth their bounty did extend,
      And those who knew that bounty to commend.
      The heads of these with holy fillets bound,
      And all their temples were with garlands crown’d.

      To these the Sibyl thus her speech address’d,
      And first to him surrounded by the rest
      Tow’ring his height, and ample was his breast;
      “Say, happy souls, divine Musaeus, say,
      Where lives Anchises, and where lies our way
      To find the hero, for whose only sake
      We sought the dark abodes, and cross’d the bitter lake?”
      To this the sacred poet thus replied:
      “In no fix’d place the happy souls reside.
      In groves we live, and lie on mossy beds,
      By crystal streams, that murmur thro’ the meads:
      But pass yon easy hill, and thence descend;
      The path conducts you to your journey’s end.”
      This said, he led them up the mountain’s brow,
      And shews them all the shining fields below.
      They wind the hill, and thro’ the blissful meadows go.

      But old Anchises, in a flow’ry vale,
      Review’d his muster’d race, and took the tale:
      Those happy spirits, which, ordain’d by fate,
      For future beings and new bodies wait.
      With studious thought observ’d th’ illustrious throng,
      In nature’s order as they pass’d along:
      Their names, their fates, their conduct, and their care,
      In peaceful senates and successful war.
      He, when Aeneas on the plain appears,
      Meets him with open arms, and falling tears.
      “Welcome,” he said, “the gods’ undoubted race!
      O long expected to my dear embrace!
      Once more ’tis giv’n me to behold your face!
      The love and pious duty which you pay
      Have pass’d the perils of so hard a way.
      ’Tis true, computing times, I now believ’d
      The happy day approach’d; nor are my hopes deceiv’d.
      What length of lands, what oceans have you pass’d;
      What storms sustain’d, and on what shores been cast?
      How have I fear’d your fate! but fear’d it most,
      When love assail’d you, on the Libyan coast.”
      To this, the filial duty thus replies:
      “Your sacred ghost before my sleeping eyes
      Appear’d, and often urg’d this painful enterprise.
      After long tossing on the Tyrrhene sea,
      My navy rides at anchor in the bay.
      But reach your hand, O parent shade, nor shun
      The dear embraces of your longing son!”
      He said; and falling tears his face bedew:
      Then thrice around his neck his arms he threw;
      And thrice the flitting shadow slipp’d away,
      Like winds, or empty dreams that fly the day.

      Now, in a secret vale, the Trojan sees
      A sep’rate grove, thro’ which a gentle breeze
      Plays with a passing breath, and whispers thro’ the trees;
      And, just before the confines of the wood,
      The gliding Lethe leads her silent flood.
      About the boughs an airy nation flew,
      Thick as the humming bees, that hunt the golden dew;
      In summer’s heat on tops of lilies feed,
      And creep within their bells, to suck the balmy seed:
      The winged army roams the fields around;
      The rivers and the rocks remurmur to the sound.
      Aeneas wond’ring stood, then ask’d the cause
      Which to the stream the crowding people draws.
      Then thus the sire: “The souls that throng the flood
      Are those to whom, by fate, are other bodies ow’d:
      In Lethe’s lake they long oblivion taste,
      Of future life secure, forgetful of the past.
      Long has my soul desir’d this time and place,
      To set before your sight your glorious race,
      That this presaging joy may fire your mind
      To seek the shores by destiny design’d.”
      “O father, can it be, that souls sublime
      Return to visit our terrestrial clime,
      And that the gen’rous mind, releas’d by death,
      Can covet lazy limbs and mortal breath?”

      Anchises then, in order, thus begun
      To clear those wonders to his godlike son:
      “Know, first, that heav’n, and earth’s compacted frame,
      And flowing waters, and the starry flame,
      And both the radiant lights, one common soul
      Inspires and feeds, and animates the whole.
      This active mind, infus’d thro’ all the space,
      Unites and mingles with the mighty mass.
      Hence men and beasts the breath of life obtain,
      And birds of air, and monsters of the main.
      Th’ ethereal vigour is in all the same,
      And every soul is fill’d with equal flame;
      As much as earthy limbs, and gross allay
      Of mortal members, subject to decay,
      Blunt not the beams of heav’n and edge of day.
      From this coarse mixture of terrestrial parts,
      Desire and fear by turns possess their hearts,
      And grief, and joy; nor can the groveling mind,
      In the dark dungeon of the limbs confin’d,
      Assert the native skies, or own its heav’nly kind:
      Nor death itself can wholly wash their stains;
      But long-contracted filth ev’n in the soul remains.
      The relics of inveterate vice they wear,
      And spots of sin obscene in ev’ry face appear.
      For this are various penances enjoin’d;
      And some are hung to bleach upon the wind,
      Some plung’d in waters, others purg’d in fires,
      Till all the dregs are drain’d, and all the rust expires.
      All have their manes, and those manes bear:
      The few, so cleans’d, to these abodes repair,
      And breathe, in ample fields, the soft Elysian air.
      Then are they happy, when by length of time
      The scurf is worn away of each committed crime;
      No speck is left of their habitual stains,
      But the pure ether of the soul remains.
      But, when a thousand rolling years are past,
      (So long their punishments and penance last,)
      Whole droves of minds are, by the driving god,
      Compell’d to drink the deep Lethaean flood,
      In large forgetful draughts to steep the cares
      Of their past labours, and their irksome years,
      That, unrememb’ring of its former pain,
      The soul may suffer mortal flesh again.”

      Thus having said, the father spirit leads
      The priestess and his son thro’ swarms of shades,
      And takes a rising ground, from thence to see
      The long procession of his progeny.
      “Survey,” pursued the sire, “this airy throng,
      As, offer’d to thy view, they pass along.
      These are th’ Italian names, which fate will join
      With ours, and graff upon the Trojan line.
      Observe the youth who first appears in sight,
      And holds the nearest station to the light,
      Already seems to snuff the vital air,
      And leans just forward, on a shining spear:
      Silvius is he, thy last-begotten race,
      But first in order sent, to fill thy place;
      An Alban name, but mix’d with Dardan blood,
      Born in the covert of a shady wood:
      Him fair Lavinia, thy surviving wife,
      Shall breed in groves, to lead a solitary life.
      In Alba he shall fix his royal seat,
      And, born a king, a race of kings beget.
      Then Procas, honour of the Trojan name,
      Capys, and Numitor, of endless fame.
      A second Silvius after these appears;
      Silvius Aeneas, for thy name he bears;
      For arms and justice equally renown’d,
      Who, late restor’d, in Alba shall be crown’d.
      How great they look! how vig’rously they wield
      Their weighty lances, and sustain the shield!
      But they, who crown’d with oaken wreaths appear,
      Shall Gabian walls and strong Fidena rear;
      Nomentum, Bola, with Pometia, found;
      And raise Collatian tow’rs on rocky ground.
      All these shall then be towns of mighty fame,
      Tho’ now they lie obscure, and lands without a name.
      See Romulus the great, born to restore
      The crown that once his injur’d grandsire wore.
      This prince a priestess of your blood shall bear,
      And like his sire in arms he shall appear.
      Two rising crests, his royal head adorn;
      Born from a god, himself to godhead born:
      His sire already signs him for the skies,
      And marks the seat amidst the deities.
      Auspicious chief! thy race, in times to come,
      Shall spread the conquests of imperial Rome.
      Rome, whose ascending tow’rs shall heav’n invade,
      Involving earth and ocean in her shade;
      High as the Mother of the Gods in place,
      And proud, like her, of an immortal race.
      Then, when in pomp she makes the Phrygian round,
      With golden turrets on her temples crown’d;
      A hundred gods her sweeping train supply;
      Her offspring all, and all command the sky.

      “Now fix your sight, and stand intent, to see
      Your Roman race, and Julian progeny.
      The mighty Caesar waits his vital hour,
      Impatient for the world, and grasps his promis’d pow’r.
      But next behold the youth of form divine,
      Caesar himself, exalted in his line;
      Augustus, promis’d oft, and long foretold,
      Sent to the realm that Saturn rul’d of old;
      Born to restore a better age of gold.
      Afric and India shall his pow’r obey;
      He shall extend his propagated sway
      Beyond the solar year, without the starry way,
      Where Atlas turns the rolling heav’ns around,
      And his broad shoulders with their lights are crown’d.
      At his foreseen approach, already quake
      The Caspian kingdoms and Maeotian lake:
      Their seers behold the tempest from afar,
      And threat’ning oracles denounce the war.
      Nile hears him knocking at his sev’nfold gates,
      And seeks his hidden spring, and fears his nephew’s fates.
      Nor Hercules more lands or labours knew,
      Not tho’ the brazen-footed hind he slew,
      Freed Erymanthus from the foaming boar,
      And dipp’d his arrows in Lernaean gore;
      Nor Bacchus, turning from his Indian war,
      By tigers drawn triumphant in his car,
      From Nisus’ top descending on the plains,
      With curling vines around his purple reins.
      And doubt we yet thro’ dangers to pursue
      The paths of honour, and a crown in view?
      But what’s the man, who from afar appears?
      His head with olive crown’d, his hand a censer bears,
      His hoary beard and holy vestments bring
      His lost idea back: I know the Roman king.
      He shall to peaceful Rome new laws ordain,
      Call’d from his mean abode a scepter to sustain.
      Him Tullus next in dignity succeeds,
      An active prince, and prone to martial deeds.
      He shall his troops for fighting fields prepare,
      Disus’d to toils, and triumphs of the war.
      By dint of sword his crown he shall increase,
      And scour his armour from the rust of peace.
      Whom Ancus follows, with a fawning air,
      But vain within, and proudly popular.
      Next view the Tarquin kings, th’ avenging sword
      Of Brutus, justly drawn, and Rome restor’d.
      He first renews the rods and ax severe,
      And gives the consuls royal robes to wear.
      His sons, who seek the tyrant to sustain,
      And long for arbitrary lords again,
      With ignominy scourg’d, in open sight,
      He dooms to death deserv’d, asserting public right.
      Unhappy man, to break the pious laws
      Of nature, pleading in his children’s cause!
      Howe’er the doubtful fact is understood,
      ’Tis love of honour, and his country’s good:
      The consul, not the father, sheds the blood.
      Behold Torquatus the same track pursue;
      And, next, the two devoted Decii view:
      The Drusian line, Camillus loaded home
      With standards well redeem’d, and foreign foes o’ercome
      The pair you see in equal armour shine,
      Now, friends below, in close embraces join;
      But, when they leave the shady realms of night,
      And, cloth’d in bodies, breathe your upper light,
      With mortal hate each other shall pursue:
      What wars, what wounds, what slaughter shall ensue!
      From Alpine heights the father first descends;
      His daughter’s husband in the plain attends:
      His daughter’s husband arms his eastern friends.
      Embrace again, my sons, be foes no more;
      Nor stain your country with her children’s gore!
      And thou, the first, lay down thy lawless claim,
      Thou, of my blood, who bear’st the Julian name!
      Another comes, who shall in triumph ride,
      And to the Capitol his chariot guide,
      From conquer’d Corinth, rich with Grecian spoils.
      And yet another, fam’d for warlike toils,
      On Argos shall impose the Roman laws,
      And on the Greeks revenge the Trojan cause;
      Shall drag in chains their Achillean race;
      Shall vindicate his ancestors’ disgrace,
      And Pallas, for her violated place.
      Great Cato there, for gravity renown’d,
      And conqu’ring Cossus goes with laurels crown’d.
      Who can omit the Gracchi? who declare
      The Scipios’ worth, those thunderbolts of war,
      The double bane of Carthage? Who can see
      Without esteem for virtuous poverty,
      Severe Fabricius, or can cease t’ admire
      The plowman consul in his coarse attire?
      Tir’d as I am, my praise the Fabii claim;
      And thou, great hero, greatest of thy name,
      Ordain’d in war to save the sinking state,
      And, by delays, to put a stop to fate!
      Let others better mould the running mass
      Of metals, and inform the breathing brass,
      And soften into flesh a marble face;
      Plead better at the bar; describe the skies,
      And when the stars descend, and when they rise.
      But, Rome, ’tis thine alone, with awful sway,
      To rule mankind, and make the world obey,
      Disposing peace and war by thy own majestic way;
      To tame the proud, the fetter’d slave to free:
      These are imperial arts, and worthy thee.”

      He paus’d; and, while with wond’ring eyes they view’d
      The passing spirits, thus his speech renew’d:
      “See great Marcellus! how, untir’d in toils,
      He moves with manly grace, how rich with regal spoils!
      He, when his country, threaten’d with alarms,
      Requires his courage and his conqu’ring arms,
      Shall more than once the Punic bands affright;
      Shall kill the Gaulish king in single fight;
      Then to the Capitol in triumph move,
      And the third spoils shall grace Feretrian Jove.”
      Aeneas here beheld, of form divine,
      A godlike youth in glitt’ring armour shine,
      With great Marcellus keeping equal pace;
      But gloomy were his eyes, dejected was his face.
      He saw, and, wond’ring, ask’d his airy guide,
      What and of whence was he, who press’d the hero’s side:
      “His son, or one of his illustrious name?
      How like the former, and almost the same!
      Observe the crowds that compass him around;
      All gaze, and all admire, and raise a shouting sound:
      But hov’ring mists around his brows are spread,
      And night, with sable shades, involves his head.”
      “Seek not to know,” the ghost replied with tears,
      “The sorrows of thy sons in future years.
      This youth (the blissful vision of a day)
      Shall just be shown on earth, and snatch’d away.
      The gods too high had rais’d the Roman state,
      Were but their gifts as permanent as great.
      What groans of men shall fill the Martian field!
      How fierce a blaze his flaming pile shall yield!
      What fun’ral pomp shall floating Tiber see,
      When, rising from his bed, he views the sad solemnity!
      No youth shall equal hopes of glory give,
      No youth afford so great a cause to grieve;
      The Trojan honour, and the Roman boast,
      Admir’d when living, and ador’d when lost!
      Mirror of ancient faith in early youth!
      Undaunted worth, inviolable truth!
      No foe, unpunish’d, in the fighting field
      Shall dare thee, foot to foot, with sword and shield;
      Much less in arms oppose thy matchless force,
      When thy sharp spurs shall urge thy foaming horse.
      Ah! couldst thou break thro’ fate’s severe decree,
      A new Marcellus shall arise in thee!
      Full canisters of fragrant lilies bring,
      Mix’d with the purple roses of the spring;
      Let me with fun’ral flow’rs his body strow;
      This gift which parents to their children owe,
      This unavailing gift, at least, I may bestow!”
      Thus having said, he led the hero round
      The confines of the blest Elysian ground;
      Which when Anchises to his son had shown,
      And fir’d his mind to mount the promis’d throne,
      He tells the future wars, ordain’d by fate;
      The strength and customs of the Latian state;
      The prince, and people; and forearms his care
      With rules, to push his fortune, or to bear.

      Two gates the silent house of Sleep adorn;
      Of polish’d ivory this, that of transparent horn:
      True visions thro’ transparent horn arise;
      Thro’ polish’d ivory pass deluding lies.
      Of various things discoursing as he pass’d,
      Anchises hither bends his steps at last.
      Then, thro’ the gate of iv’ry, he dismiss’d
      His valiant offspring and divining guest.
      Straight to the ships Aeneas took his way,
      Embark’d his men, and skimm’d along the sea,
      Still coasting, till he gain’d Cajeta’s bay.
      At length on oozy ground his galleys moor;
      Their heads are turn’d to sea, their sterns to shore.



 

      And thou, O matron of immortal fame,
      Here dying, to the shore hast left thy name;
      Cajeta still the place is call’d from thee,
      The nurse of great Aeneas’ infancy.
      Here rest thy bones in rich Hesperia’s plains;
      Thy name (’tis all a ghost can have) remains.

      Now, when the prince her fun’ral rites had paid,
      He plow’d the Tyrrhene seas with sails display’d.
      From land a gentle breeze arose by night,
      Serenely shone the stars, the moon was bright,
      And the sea trembled with her silver light.
      Now near the shelves of Circe’s shores they run,
      (Circe the rich, the daughter of the Sun,)
      A dang’rous coast: the goddess wastes her days
      In joyous songs; the rocks resound her lays:
      In spinning, or the loom, she spends the night,
      And cedar brands supply her father’s light.
      From hence were heard, rebellowing to the main,
      The roars of lions that refuse the chain,
      The grunts of bristled boars, and groans of bears,
      And herds of howling wolves that stun the sailors’ ears.
      These from their caverns, at the close of night,
      Fill the sad isle with horror and affright.
      Darkling they mourn their fate, whom Circe’s pow’r,
      (That watch’d the moon and planetary hour,)
      With words and wicked herbs from humankind
      Had alter’d, and in brutal shapes confin’d.
      Which monsters lest the Trojans’ pious host
      Should bear, or touch upon th’ inchanted coast,
      Propitious Neptune steer’d their course by night
      With rising gales that sped their happy flight.
      Supplied with these, they skim the sounding shore,
      And hear the swelling surges vainly roar.
      Now, when the rosy morn began to rise,
      And wav’d her saffron streamer thro’ the skies;
      When Thetis blush’d in purple not her own,
      And from her face the breathing winds were blown,
      A sudden silence sate upon the sea,
      And sweeping oars, with struggling, urge their way.
      The Trojan, from the main, beheld a wood,
      Which thick with shades and a brown horror stood:
      Betwixt the trees the Tiber took his course,
      With whirlpools dimpled; and with downward force,
      That drove the sand along, he took his way,
      And roll’d his yellow billows to the sea.
      About him, and above, and round the wood,
      The birds that haunt the borders of his flood,
      That bath’d within, or basked upon his side,
      To tuneful songs their narrow throats applied.
      The captain gives command; the joyful train
      Glide thro’ the gloomy shade, and leave the main.

      Now, Erato, thy poet’s mind inspire,
      And fill his soul with thy celestial fire!
      Relate what Latium was; her ancient kings;
      Declare the past and present state of things,
      When first the Trojan fleet Ausonia sought,
      And how the rivals lov’d, and how they fought.
      These are my theme, and how the war began,
      And how concluded by the godlike man:
      For I shall sing of battles, blood, and rage,
      Which princes and their people did engage;
      And haughty souls, that, mov’d with mutual hate,
      In fighting fields pursued and found their fate;
      That rous’d the Tyrrhene realm with loud alarms,
      And peaceful Italy involv’d in arms.
      A larger scene of action is display’d;
      And, rising hence, a greater work is weigh’d.

      Latinus, old and mild, had long possess’d
      The Latin scepter, and his people blest:
      His father Faunus; a Laurentian dame
      His mother; fair Marica was her name.
      But Faunus came from Picus: Picus drew
      His birth from Saturn, if records be true.
      Thus King Latinus, in the third degree,
      Had Saturn author of his family.
      But this old peaceful prince, as Heav’n decreed,
      Was blest with no male issue to succeed:
      His sons in blooming youth were snatch’d by fate;
      One only daughter heir’d the royal state.
      Fir’d with her love, and with ambition led,
      The neighb’ring princes court her nuptial bed.
      Among the crowd, but far above the rest,
      Young Turnus to the beauteous maid address’d.
      Turnus, for high descent and graceful mien,
      Was first, and favour’d by the Latian queen;
      With him she strove to join Lavinia’s hand,
      But dire portents the purpos’d match withstand.

      Deep in the palace, of long growth, there stood
      A laurel’s trunk, a venerable wood;
      Where rites divine were paid; whose holy hair
      Was kept and cut with superstitious care.
      This plant Latinus, when his town he wall’d,
      Then found, and from the tree Laurentum call’d;
      And last, in honour of his new abode,
      He vow’d the laurel to the laurel’s god.
      It happen’d once (a boding prodigy!)
      A swarm of bees, that cut the liquid sky,
      Unknown from whence they took their airy flight,
      Upon the topmost branch in clouds alight;
      There with their clasping feet together clung,
      And a long cluster from the laurel hung.
      An ancient augur prophesied from hence:
      “Behold on Latian shores a foreign prince!
      From the same parts of heav’n his navy stands,
      To the same parts on earth; his army lands;
      The town he conquers, and the tow’r commands.”

      Yet more, when fair Lavinia fed the fire
      Before the gods, and stood beside her sire,
      Strange to relate, the flames, involv’d in smoke
      Of incense, from the sacred altar broke,
      Caught her dishevel’d hair and rich attire;
      Her crown and jewels crackled in the fire:
      From thence the fuming trail began to spread
      And lambent glories danc’d about her head.
      This new portent the seer with wonder views,
      Then pausing, thus his prophecy renews:
      “The nymph, who scatters flaming fires around,
      Shall shine with honour, shall herself be crown’d;
      But, caus’d by her irrevocable fate,
      War shall the country waste, and change the state.”

      Latinus, frighted with this dire ostent,
      For counsel to his father Faunus went,
      And sought the shades renown’d for prophecy
      Which near Albunea’s sulph’rous fountain lie.
      To these the Latian and the Sabine land
      Fly, when distress’d, and thence relief demand.
      The priest on skins of off’rings takes his ease,
      And nightly visions in his slumber sees;
      A swarm of thin aerial shapes appears,
      And, flutt’ring round his temples, deafs his ears:
      These he consults, the future fates to know,
      From pow’rs above, and from the fiends below.
      Here, for the gods’ advice, Latinus flies,
      Off’ring a hundred sheep for sacrifice:
      Their woolly fleeces, as the rites requir’d,
      He laid beneath him, and to rest retir’d.
      No sooner were his eyes in slumber bound,
      When, from above, a more than mortal sound
      Invades his ears; and thus the vision spoke:
      “Seek not, my seed, in Latian bands to yoke
      Our fair Lavinia, nor the gods provoke.
      A foreign son upon thy shore descends,
      Whose martial fame from pole to pole extends.
      His race, in arms and arts of peace renown’d,
      Not Latium shall contain, nor Europe bound:
      ’Tis theirs whate’er the sun surveys around.”
      These answers, in the silent night receiv’d,
      The king himself divulg’d, the land believ’d:
      The fame thro’ all the neighb’ring nations flew,
      When now the Trojan navy was in view.

      Beneath a shady tree, the hero spread
      His table on the turf, with cakes of bread;
      And, with his chiefs, on forest fruits he fed.
      They sate; and, (not without the god’s command,)
      Their homely fare dispatch’d, the hungry band
      Invade their trenchers next, and soon devour,
      To mend the scanty meal, their cakes of flour.
      Ascanius this observ’d, and smiling said:
      “See, we devour the plates on which we fed.”
      The speech had omen, that the Trojan race
      Should find repose, and this the time and place.
      Aeneas took the word, and thus replies,
      Confessing fate with wonder in his eyes:
      “All hail, O earth! all hail, my household gods!
      Behold the destin’d place of your abodes!
      For thus Anchises prophesied of old,
      And this our fatal place of rest foretold:
      ‘When, on a foreign shore, instead of meat,
      By famine forc’d, your trenchers you shall eat,
      Then ease your weary Trojans will attend,
      And the long labours of your voyage end.
      Remember on that happy coast to build,
      And with a trench inclose the fruitful field.’
      This was that famine, this the fatal place
      Which ends the wand’ring of our exil’d race.
      Then, on tomorrow’s dawn, your care employ,
      To search the land, and where the cities lie,
      And what the men; but give this day to joy.
      Now pour to Jove; and, after Jove is blest,
      Call great Anchises to the genial feast:
      Crown high the goblets with a cheerful draught;
      Enjoy the present hour; adjourn the future thought.”

      Thus having said, the hero bound his brows
      With leafy branches, then perform’d his vows;
      Adoring first the genius of the place,
      Then Earth, the mother of the heav’nly race,
      The nymphs, and native godheads yet unknown,
      And Night, and all the stars that gild her sable throne,
      And ancient Cybel, and Idaean Jove,
      And last his sire below, and mother queen above.
      Then heav’n’s high monarch thunder’d thrice aloud,
      And thrice he shook aloft a golden cloud.
      Soon thro’ the joyful camp a rumour flew,
      The time was come their city to renew.
      Then ev’ry brow with cheerful green is crown’d,
      The feasts are doubled, and the bowls go round.

      When next the rosy morn disclos’d the day,
      The scouts to sev’ral parts divide their way,
      To learn the natives’ names, their towns explore,
      The coasts and trendings of the crooked shore:
      Here Tiber flows, and here Numicus stands;
      Here warlike Latins hold the happy lands.
      The pious chief, who sought by peaceful ways
      To found his empire, and his town to raise,
      A hundred youths from all his train selects,
      And to the Latian court their course directs,
      (The spacious palace where their prince resides,)
      And all their heads with wreaths of olive hides.
      They go commission’d to require a peace,
      And carry presents to procure access.
      Thus while they speed their pace, the prince designs
      His new-elected seat, and draws the lines.
      The Trojans round the place a rampire cast,
      And palisades about the trenches plac’d.

      Meantime the train, proceeding on their way,
      From far the town and lofty tow’rs survey;
      At length approach the walls. Without the gate,
      They see the boys and Latian youth debate
      The martial prizes on the dusty plain:
      Some drive the cars, and some the coursers rein;
      Some bend the stubborn bow for victory,
      And some with darts their active sinews try.
      A posting messenger, dispatch’d from hence,
      Of this fair troop advis’d their aged prince,
      That foreign men of mighty stature came;
      Uncouth their habit, and unknown their name.
      The king ordains their entrance, and ascends
      His regal seat, surrounded by his friends.

      The palace built by Picus, vast and proud,
      Supported by a hundred pillars stood,
      And round incompass’d with a rising wood.
      The pile o’erlook’d the town, and drew the sight;
      Surpris’d at once with reverence and delight.
      There kings receiv’d the marks of sov’reign pow’r;
      In state the monarchs march’d; the lictors bore
      Their awful axes and the rods before.
      Here the tribunal stood, the house of pray’r,
      And here the sacred senators repair;
      All at large tables, in long order set,
      A ram their off’ring, and a ram their meat.
      Above the portal, carv’d in cedar wood,
      Plac’d in their ranks, their godlike grandsires stood;
      Old Saturn, with his crooked scythe, on high;
      And Italus, that led the colony;
      And ancient Janus, with his double face,
      And bunch of keys, the porter of the place.
      There good Sabinus, planter of the vines,
      On a short pruning hook his head reclines,
      And studiously surveys his gen’rous wines;
      Then warlike kings, who for their country fought,
      And honourable wounds from battle brought.
      Around the posts hung helmets, darts, and spears,
      And captive chariots, axes, shields, and bars,
      And broken beaks of ships, the trophies of their wars.
      Above the rest, as chief of all the band,
      Was Picus plac’d, a buckler in his hand;
      His other wav’d a long divining wand.
      Girt in his Gabin gown the hero sate,
      Yet could not with his art avoid his fate:
      For Circe long had lov’d the youth in vain,
      Till love, refus’d, converted to disdain:
      Then, mixing pow’rful herbs, with magic art,
      She chang’d his form, who could not change his heart;
      Constrain’d him in a bird, and made him fly,
      With party-colour’d plumes, a chatt’ring pie.

      In this high temple, on a chair of state,
      The seat of audience, old Latinus sate;
      Then gave admission to the Trojan train;
      And thus with pleasing accents he began:
      “Tell me, ye Trojans, for that name you own,
      Nor is your course upon our coasts unknown;
      Say what you seek, and whither were you bound:
      Were you by stress of weather cast aground?
      Such dangers as on seas are often seen,
      And oft befall to miserable men,
      Or come, your shipping in our ports to lay,
      Spent and disabled in so long a way?
      Say what you want: the Latians you shall find
      Not forc’d to goodness, but by will inclin’d;
      For, since the time of Saturn’s holy reign,
      His hospitable customs we retain.
      I call to mind (but time the tale has worn)
      Th’ Arunci told, that Dardanus, tho’ born
      On Latian plains, yet sought the Phrygian shore,
      And Samothracia, Samos call’d before.
      From Tuscan Coritum he claim’d his birth;
      But after, when exempt from mortal earth,
      From thence ascended to his kindred skies,
      A god, and, as a god, augments their sacrifice.”

      He said. Ilioneus made this reply:
      “O king, of Faunus’ royal family!
      Nor wintry winds to Latium forc’d our way,
      Nor did the stars our wand’ring course betray.
      Willing we sought your shores; and, hither bound,
      The port, so long desir’d, at length we found;
      From our sweet homes and ancient realms expell’d;
      Great as the greatest that the sun beheld.
      The god began our line, who rules above;
      And, as our race, our king descends from Jove:
      And hither are we come, by his command,
      To crave admission in your happy land.
      How dire a tempest, from Mycenae pour’d,
      Our plains, our temples, and our town devour’d;
      What was the waste of war, what fierce alarms
      Shook Asia’s crown with European arms;
      Ev’n such have heard, if any such there be,
      Whose earth is bounded by the frozen sea;
      And such as, born beneath the burning sky
      And sultry sun, betwixt the tropics lie.
      From that dire deluge, thro’ the wat’ry waste,
      Such length of years, such various perils past,
      At last escap’d, to Latium we repair,
      To beg what you without your want may spare:
      The common water, and the common air;
      Sheds which ourselves will build, and mean abodes,
      Fit to receive and serve our banish’d gods.
      Nor our admission shall your realm disgrace,
      Nor length of time our gratitude efface.
      Besides, what endless honour you shall gain,
      To save and shelter Troy’s unhappy train!
      Now, by my sov’reign, and his fate, I swear,
      Renown’d for faith in peace, for force in war;
      Oft our alliance other lands desir’d,
      And, what we seek of you, of us requir’d.
      Despite not then, that in our hands we bear
      These holy boughs, and sue with words of pray’r.
      Fate and the gods, by their supreme command,
      Have doom’d our ships to seek the Latian land.
      To these abodes our fleet Apollo sends;
      Here Dardanus was born, and hither tends;
      Where Tuscan Tiber rolls with rapid force,
      And where Numicus opes his holy source.
      Besides, our prince presents, with his request,
      Some small remains of what his sire possess’d.
      This golden charger, snatch’d from burning Troy,
      Anchises did in sacrifice employ;
      This royal robe and this tiara wore
      Old Priam, and this golden scepter bore
      In full assemblies, and in solemn games;
      These purple vests were weav’d by Dardan dames.”

      Thus while he spoke, Latinus roll’d around
      His eyes, and fix’d a while upon the ground.
      Intent he seem’d, and anxious in his breast;
      Not by the scepter mov’d, or kingly vest,
      But pond’ring future things of wondrous weight;
      Succession, empire, and his daughter’s fate.
      On these he mus’d within his thoughtful mind,
      And then revolv’d what Faunus had divin’d.
      This was the foreign prince, by fate decreed
      To share his scepter, and Lavinia’s bed;
      This was the race that sure portents foreshew
      To sway the world, and land and sea subdue.
      At length he rais’d his cheerful head, and spoke:
      “The pow’rs,” said he, “the pow’rs we both invoke,
      To you, and yours, and mine, propitious be,
      And firm our purpose with their augury!
      Have what you ask; your presents I receive;
      Land, where and when you please, with ample leave;
      Partake and use my kingdom as your own;
      All shall be yours, while I command the crown:
      And, if my wish’d alliance please your king,
      Tell him he should not send the peace, but bring.
      Then let him not a friend’s embraces fear;
      The peace is made when I behold him here.
      Besides this answer, tell my royal guest,
      I add to his commands my own request:
      One only daughter heirs my crown and state,
      Whom not our oracles, nor Heav’n, nor fate,
      Nor frequent prodigies, permit to join
      With any native of th’ Ausonian line.
      A foreign son-in-law shall come from far
      (Such is our doom), a chief renown’d in war,
      Whose race shall bear aloft the Latian name,
      And thro’ the conquer’d world diffuse our fame.
      Himself to be the man the fates require,
      I firmly judge, and, what I judge, desire.”

      He said, and then on each bestow’d a steed.
      Three hundred horses, in high stables fed,
      Stood ready, shining all, and smoothly dress’d:
      Of these he chose the fairest and the best,
      To mount the Trojan troop. At his command
      The steeds caparison’d with purple stand,
      With golden trappings, glorious to behold,
      And champ betwixt their teeth the foaming gold.
      Then to his absent guest the king decreed
      A pair of coursers born of heav’nly breed,
      Who from their nostrils breath’d ethereal fire;
      Whom Circe stole from her celestial sire,
      By substituting mares produc’d on earth,
      Whose wombs conceiv’d a more than mortal birth.
      These draw the chariot which Latinus sends,
      And the rich present to the prince commends.
      Sublime on stately steeds the Trojans borne,
      To their expecting lord with peace return.

      But jealous Juno, from Pachynus’ height,
      As she from Argos took her airy flight,
      Beheld with envious eyes this hateful sight.
      She saw the Trojan and his joyful train
      Descend upon the shore, desert the main,
      Design a town, and, with unhop’d success,
      Th’ embassadors return with promis’d peace.
      Then, pierc’d with pain, she shook her haughty head,
      Sigh’d from her inward soul, and thus she said:
      “O hated offspring of my Phrygian foes!
      O fates of Troy, which Juno’s fates oppose!
      Could they not fall unpitied on the plain,
      But slain revive, and, taken, scape again?
      When execrable Troy in ashes lay,
      Thro’ fires and swords and seas they forc’d their way.
      Then vanquish’d Juno must in vain contend,
      Her rage disarm’d, her empire at an end.
      Breathless and tir’d, is all my fury spent?
      Or does my glutted spleen at length relent?
      As if ’twere little from their town to chase,
      I thro’ the seas pursued their exil’d race;
      Ingag’d the heav’ns, oppos’d the stormy main;
      But billows roar’d, and tempests rag’d in vain.
      What have my Scyllas and my Syrtes done,
      When these they overpass, and those they shun?
      On Tiber’s shores they land, secure of fate,
      Triumphant o’er the storms and Juno’s hate.
      Mars could in mutual blood the Centaurs bathe,
      And Jove himself gave way to Cynthia’s wrath,
      Who sent the tusky boar to Calydon;
      What great offence had either people done?
      But I, the consort of the Thunderer,
      Have wag’d a long and unsuccessful war,
      With various arts and arms in vain have toil’d,
      And by a mortal man at length am foil’d.
      If native pow’r prevail not, shall I doubt
      To seek for needful succour from without?
      If Jove and Heav’n my just desires deny,
      Hell shall the pow’r of Heav’n and Jove supply.
      Grant that the Fates have firm’d, by their decree,
      The Trojan race to reign in Italy;
      At least I can defer the nuptial day,
      And with protracted wars the peace delay:
      With blood the dear alliance shall be bought,
      And both the people near destruction brought;
      So shall the son-in-law and father join,
      With ruin, war, and waste of either line.
      O fatal maid, thy marriage is endow’d
      With Phrygian, Latian, and Rutulian blood!
      Bellona leads thee to thy lover’s hand;
      Another queen brings forth another brand,
      To burn with foreign fires another land!
      A second Paris, diff’ring but in name,
      Shall fire his country with a second flame.”

      Thus having said, she sinks beneath the ground,
      With furious haste, and shoots the Stygian sound,
      To rouse Alecto from th’ infernal seat
      Of her dire sisters, and their dark retreat.
      This Fury, fit for her intent, she chose;
      One who delights in wars and human woes.
      Ev’n Pluto hates his own misshapen race;
      Her sister Furies fly her hideous face;
      So frightful are the forms the monster takes,
      So fierce the hissings of her speckled snakes.
      Her Juno finds, and thus inflames her spite:
      “O virgin daughter of eternal Night,
      Give me this once thy labour, to sustain
      My right, and execute my just disdain.
      Let not the Trojans, with a feign’d pretence
      Of proffer’d peace, delude the Latian prince.
      Expel from Italy that odious name,
      And let not Juno suffer in her fame.
      ’Tis thine to ruin realms, o’erturn a state,
      Betwixt the dearest friends to raise debate,
      And kindle kindred blood to mutual hate.
      Thy hand o’er towns the fun’ral torch displays,
      And forms a thousand ills ten thousand ways.
      Now shake, out thy fruitful breast, the seeds
      Of envy, discord, and of cruel deeds:
      Confound the peace establish’d, and prepare
      Their souls to hatred, and their hands to war.”

      Smear’d as she was with black Gorgonian blood,
      The Fury sprang above the Stygian flood;
      And on her wicker wings, sublime thro’ night,
      She to the Latian palace took her flight:
      There sought the queen’s apartment, stood before
      The peaceful threshold, and besieg’d the door.
      Restless Amata lay, her swelling breast
      Fir’d with disdain for Turnus dispossess’d,
      And the new nuptials of the Trojan guest.
      From her black bloody locks the Fury shakes
      Her darling plague, the fav’rite of her snakes;
      With her full force she threw the poisonous dart,
      And fix’d it deep within Amata’s heart,
      That, thus envenom’d, she might kindle rage,
      And sacrifice to strife her house and husband’s age.
      Unseen, unfelt, the fiery serpent skims
      Betwixt her linen and her naked limbs;
      His baleful breath inspiring, as he glides,
      Now like a chain around her neck he rides,
      Now like a fillet to her head repairs,
      And with his circling volumes folds her hairs.
      At first the silent venom slid with ease,
      And seiz’d her cooler senses by degrees;
      Then, ere th’ infected mass was fir’d too far,
      In plaintive accents she began the war,
      And thus bespoke her husband: “Shall,” she said,
      “A wand’ring prince enjoy Lavinia’s bed?
      If nature plead not in a parent’s heart,
      Pity my tears, and pity her desert.
      I know, my dearest lord, the time will come,
      You’d in vain, reverse your cruel doom;
      The faithless pirate soon will set to sea,
      And bear the royal virgin far away!
      A guest like him, a Trojan guest before,
      In shew of friendship sought the Spartan shore,
      And ravish’d Helen from her husband bore.
      Think on a king’s inviolable word;
      And think on Turnus, her once plighted lord:
      To this false foreigner you give your throne,
      And wrong a friend, a kinsman, and a son.
      Resume your ancient care; and, if the god
      Your sire, and you, resolve on foreign blood,
      Know all are foreign, in a larger sense,
      Not born your subjects, or deriv’d from hence.
      Then, if the line of Turnus you retrace,
      He springs from Inachus of Argive race.”

      But when she saw her reasons idly spent,
      And could not move him from his fix’d intent,
      She flew to rage; for now the snake possess’d
      Her vital parts, and poison’d all her breast;
      She raves, she runs with a distracted pace,
      And fills with horrid howls the public place.
      And, as young striplings whip the top for sport,
      On the smooth pavement of an empty court;
      The wooden engine flies and whirls about,
      Admir’d, with clamours, of the beardless rout;
      They lash aloud; each other they provoke,
      And lend their little souls at ev’ry stroke:
      Thus fares the queen; and thus her fury blows
      Amidst the crowd, and kindles as she goes.
      Nor yet content, she strains her malice more,
      And adds new ills to those contriv’d before:
      She flies the town, and, mixing with a throng
      Of madding matrons, bears the bride along,
      Wand’ring thro’ woods and wilds, and devious ways,
      And with these arts the Trojan match delays.
      She feign’d the rites of Bacchus; cried aloud,
      And to the buxom god the virgin vow’d.
      “Evoe! O Bacchus!” thus began the song;
      And “Evoe!” answer’d all the female throng.
      “O virgin! worthy thee alone!” she cried;
      “O worthy thee alone!” the crew replied.
      “For thee she feeds her hair, she leads thy dance,
      And with thy winding ivy wreathes her lance.”
      Like fury seiz’d the rest; the progress known,
      All seek the mountains, and forsake the town:
      All, clad in skins of beasts, the jav’lin bear,
      Give to the wanton winds their flowing hair,
      And shrieks and shoutings rend the suff’ring air.
      The queen herself, inspir’d with rage divine,
      Shook high above her head a flaming pine;
      Then roll’d her haggard eyes around the throng,
      And sung, in Turnus’ name, the nuptial song:
      “Io, ye Latian dames! if any here
      Hold your unhappy queen, Amata, dear;
      If there be here,” she said, “who dare maintain
      My right, nor think the name of mother vain;
      Unbind your fillets, loose your flowing hair,
      And orgies and nocturnal rites prepare.”

      Amata’s breast the Fury thus invades,
      And fires with rage, amid the sylvan shades;
      Then, when she found her venom spread so far,
      The royal house embroil’d in civil war,
      Rais’d on her dusky wings, she cleaves the skies,
      And seeks the palace where young Turnus lies.
      His town, as fame reports, was built of old
      By Danae, pregnant with almighty gold,
      Who fled her father’s rage, and, with a train
      Of following Argives, thro’ the stormy main,
      Driv’n by the southern blasts, was fated here to reign.
      ’Twas Ardua once; now Ardea’s name it bears;
      Once a fair city, now consum’d with years.
      Here, in his lofty palace, Turnus lay,
      Betwixt the confines of the night and day,
      Secure in sleep. The Fury laid aside
      Her looks and limbs, and with new methods tried
      The foulness of th’ infernal form to hide.
      Propp’d on a staff, she takes a trembling mien:
      Her face is furrow’d, and her front obscene;
      Deep-dinted wrinkles on her cheek she draws;
      Sunk are her eyes, and toothless are her jaws;
      Her hoary hair with holy fillets bound,
      Her temples with an olive wreath are crown’d.
      Old Chalybe, who kept the sacred fane
      Of Juno, now she seem’d, and thus began,
      Appearing in a dream, to rouse the careless man:
      “Shall Turnus then such endless toil sustain
      In fighting fields, and conquer towns in vain?
      Win, for a Trojan head to wear the prize,
      Usurp thy crown, enjoy thy victories?
      The bride and scepter which thy blood has bought,
      The king transfers; and foreign heirs are sought.
      Go now, deluded man, and seek again
      New toils, new dangers, on the dusty plain.
      Repel the Tuscan foes; their city seize;
      Protect the Latians in luxurious ease.
      This dream all-pow’rful Juno sends; I bear
      Her mighty mandates, and her words you hear.
      Haste; arm your Ardeans; issue to the plain;
      With fate to friend, assault the Trojan train:
      Their thoughtless chiefs, their painted ships, that lie
      In Tiber’s mouth, with fire and sword destroy.
      The Latian king, unless he shall submit,
      Own his old promise, and his new forget;
      Let him, in arms, the pow’r of Turnus prove,
      And learn to fear whom he disdains to love.
      For such is Heav’n’s command.” The youthful prince
      With scorn replied, and made this bold defence:
      “You tell me, mother, what I knew before:
      The Phrygian fleet is landed on the shore.
      I neither fear nor will provoke the war;
      My fate is Juno’s most peculiar care.
      But time has made you dote, and vainly tell
      Of arms imagin’d in your lonely cell.
      Go; be the temple and the gods your care;
      Permit to men the thought of peace and war.”

      These haughty words Alecto’s rage provoke,
      And frighted Turnus trembled as she spoke.
      Her eyes grow stiffen’d, and with sulphur burn;
      Her hideous looks and hellish form return;
      Her curling snakes with hissings fill the place,
      And open all the furies of her face:
      Then, darting fire from her malignant eyes,
      She cast him backward as he strove to rise,
      And, ling’ring, sought to frame some new replies.
      High on her head she rears two twisted snakes,
      Her chains she rattles, and her whip she shakes;
      And, churning bloody foam, thus loudly speaks:
      “Behold whom time has made to dote, and tell
      Of arms imagin’d in her lonely cell!
      Behold the Fates’ infernal minister!
      War, death, destruction, in my hand I bear.”

      Thus having said, her smould’ring torch, impress’d
      With her full force, she plung’d into his breast.
      Aghast he wak’d; and, starting from his bed,
      Cold sweat, in clammy drops, his limbs o’erspread.
      “Arms! arms!” he cries: “my sword and shield prepare!”
      He breathes defiance, blood, and mortal war.
      So, when with crackling flames a caldron fries,
      The bubbling waters from the bottom rise:
      Above the brims they force their fiery way;
      Black vapours climb aloft, and cloud the day.

      The peace polluted thus, a chosen band
      He first commissions to the Latian land,
      In threat’ning embassy; then rais’d the rest,
      To meet in arms th’ intruding Trojan guest,
      To force the foes from the Lavinian shore,
      And Italy’s indanger’d peace restore.
      Himself alone an equal match he boasts,
      To fight the Phrygian and Ausonian hosts.
      The gods invok’d, the Rutuli prepare
      Their arms, and warn each other to the war.
      His beauty these, and those his blooming age,
      The rest his house and his own fame engage.

      While Turnus urges thus his enterprise,
      The Stygian Fury to the Trojans flies;
      New frauds invents, and takes a steepy stand,
      Which overlooks the vale with wide command;
      Where fair Ascanius and his youthful train,
      With horns and hounds, a hunting match ordain,
      And pitch their toils around the shady plain.
      The Fury fires the pack; they snuff, they vent,
      And feed their hungry nostrils with the scent.
      ’Twas of a well-grown stag, whose antlers rise
      High o’er his front; his beams invade the skies.
      From this light cause th’ infernal maid prepares
      The country churls to mischief, hate, and wars.

      The stately beast the two Tyrrhidae bred,
      Snatch’d from his dams, and the tame youngling fed.
      Their father Tyrrheus did his fodder bring,
      Tyrrheus, chief ranger to the Latian king:
      Their sister Silvia cherish’d with her care
      The little wanton, and did wreaths prepare
      To hang his budding horns, with ribbons tied
      His tender neck, and comb’d his silken hide,
      And bathed his body. Patient of command
      In time he grew, and, growing us’d to hand,
      He waited at his master’s board for food;
      Then sought his salvage kindred in the wood,
      Where grazing all the day, at night he came
      To his known lodgings, and his country dame.

      This household beast, that us’d the woodland grounds,
      Was view’d at first by the young hero’s hounds,
      As down the stream he swam, to seek retreat
      In the cool waters, and to quench his heat.
      Ascanius young, and eager of his game,
      Soon bent his bow, uncertain in his aim;
      But the dire fiend the fatal arrow guides,
      Which pierc’d his bowels thro’ his panting sides.
      The bleeding creature issues from the floods,
      Possess’d with fear, and seeks his known abodes,
      His old familiar hearth and household gods.
      He falls; he fills the house with heavy groans,
      Implores their pity, and his pain bemoans.
      Young Silvia beats her breast, and cries aloud
      For succour from the clownish neighbourhood:
      The churls assemble; for the fiend, who lay
      In the close woody covert, urg’d their way.
      One with a brand yet burning from the flame,
      Arm’d with a knotty club another came:
      Whate’er they catch or find, without their care,
      Their fury makes an instrument of war.
      Tyrrheus, the foster father of the beast,
      Then clench’d a hatchet in his horny fist,
      But held his hand from the descending stroke,
      And left his wedge within the cloven oak,
      To whet their courage and their rage provoke.
      And now the goddess, exercis’d in ill,
      Who watch’d an hour to work her impious will,
      Ascends the roof, and to her crooked horn,
      Such as was then by Latian shepherds borne,
      Adds all her breath: the rocks and woods around,
      And mountains, tremble at th’ infernal sound.
      The sacred lake of Trivia from afar,
      The Veline fountains, and sulphureous Nar,
      Shake at the baleful blast, the signal of the war.
      Young mothers wildly stare, with fear possess’d,
      And strain their helpless infants to their breast.

      The clowns, a boist’rous, rude, ungovern’d crew,
      With furious haste to the loud summons flew.
      The pow’rs of Troy, then issuing on the plain,
      With fresh recruits their youthful chief sustain:
      Not theirs a raw and unexperienc’d train,
      But a firm body of embattled men.
      At first, while fortune favour’d neither side,
      The fight with clubs and burning brands was tried;
      But now, both parties reinforc’d, the fields
      Are bright with flaming swords and brazen shields.
      A shining harvest either host displays,
      And shoots against the sun with equal rays.
      Thus, when a black-brow’d gust begins to rise,
      White foam at first on the curl’d ocean fries;
      Then roars the main, the billows mount the skies;
      Till, by the fury of the storm full blown,
      The muddy bottom o’er the clouds is thrown.
      First Almon falls, old Tyrrheus’ eldest care,
      Pierc’d with an arrow from the distant war:
      Fix’d in his throat the flying weapon stood,
      And stopp’d his breath, and drank his vital blood
      Huge heaps of slain around the body rise:
      Among the rest, the rich Galesus lies;
      A good old man, while peace he preach’d in vain,
      Amidst the madness of th’ unruly train:
      Five herds, five bleating flocks, his pastures fill’d;
      His lands a hundred yoke of oxen till’d.

      Thus, while in equal scales their fortune stood
      The Fury bath’d them in each other’s blood;
      Then, having fix’d the fight, exulting flies,
      And bears fulfill’d her promise to the skies.
      To Juno thus she speaks: “Behold! It is done,
      The blood already drawn, the war begun;
      The discord is complete; nor can they cease
      The dire debate, nor you command the peace.
      Now, since the Latian and the Trojan brood
      Have tasted vengeance and the sweets of blood;
      Speak, and my pow’r shall add this office more:
      The neighbr’ing nations of th’ Ausonian shore
      Shall hear the dreadful rumour, from afar,
      Of arm’d invasion, and embrace the war.”
      Then Juno thus: “The grateful work is done,
      The seeds of discord sow’d, the war begun;
      Frauds, fears, and fury have possess’d the state,
      And fix’d the causes of a lasting hate.
      A bloody Hymen shall th’ alliance join
      Betwixt the Trojan and Ausonian line:
      But thou with speed to night and hell repair;
      For not the gods, nor angry Jove, will bear
      Thy lawless wand’ring walks in upper air.
      Leave what remains to me.” Saturnia said:
      The sullen fiend her sounding wings display’d,
      Unwilling left the light, and sought the nether shade.

      In midst of Italy, well known to fame,
      There lies a lake, Amsanctus is the name,
      Below the lofty mounts: on either side
      Thick forests the forbidden entrance hide.
      Full in the centre of the sacred wood
      An arm arises of the Stygian flood,
      Which, breaking from beneath with bellowing sound,
      Whirls the black waves and rattling stones around.
      Here Pluto pants for breath from out his cell,
      And opens wide the grinning jaws of hell.
      To this infernal lake the Fury flies;
      Here hides her hated head, and frees the lab’ring skies.

      Saturnian Juno now, with double care,
      Attends the fatal process of the war.
      The clowns, return’d, from battle bear the slain,
      Implore the gods, and to their king complain.
      The corps of Almon and the rest are shown;
      Shrieks, clamours, murmurs, fill the frighted town.
      Ambitious Turnus in the press appears,
      And, aggravating crimes, augments their fears;
      Proclaims his private injuries aloud,
      A solemn promise made, and disavow’d;
      A foreign son is sought, and a mix’d mungril brood.
      Then they, whose mothers, frantic with their fear,
      In woods and wilds the flags of Bacchus bear,
      And lead his dances with dishevel’d hair,
      Increase the clamour, and the war demand,
      (Such was Amata’s int’rest in the land,)
      Against the public sanctions of the peace,
      Against all omens of their ill success.
      With fates averse, the rout in arms resort,
      To force their monarch, and insult the court.
      But, like a rock unmov’d, a rock that braves
      The raging tempest and the rising waves,
      Propp’d on himself he stands; his solid sides
      Wash off the seaweeds, and the sounding tides:
      So stood the pious prince, unmov’d, and long
      Sustain’d the madness of the noisy throng.
      But, when he found that Juno’s pow’r prevail’d,
      And all the methods of cool counsel fail’d,
      He calls the gods to witness their offence,
      Disclaims the war, asserts his innocence.
      “Hurried by fate,” he cries, “and borne before
      A furious wind, we have the faithful shore.
      O more than madmen! you yourselves shall bear
      The guilt of blood and sacrilegious war:
      Thou, Turnus, shalt atone it by thy fate,
      And pray to Heav’n for peace, but pray too late.
      For me, my stormy voyage at an end,
      I to the port of death securely tend.
      The fun’ral pomp which to your kings you pay,
      Is all I want, and all you take away.”
      He said no more, but, in his walls confin’d,
      Shut out the woes which he too well divin’d
      Nor with the rising storm would vainly strive,
      But left the helm, and let the vessel drive.

      A solemn custom was observ’d of old,
      Which Latium held, and now the Romans hold,
      Their standard when in fighting fields they rear
      Against the fierce Hyrcanians, or declare
      The Scythian, Indian, or Arabian war;
      Or from the boasting Parthians would regain
      Their eagles, lost in Carrhae’s bloody plain.
      Two gates of steel (the name of Mars they bear,
      And still are worship’d with religious fear)
      Before his temple stand: the dire abode,
      And the fear’d issues of the furious god,
      Are fenc’d with brazen bolts; without the gates,
      The wary guardian Janus doubly waits.
      Then, when the sacred senate votes the wars,
      The Roman consul their decree declares,
      And in his robes the sounding gates unbars.
      The youth in military shouts arise,
      And the loud trumpets break the yielding skies.
      These rites, of old by sov’reign princes us’d,
      Were the king’s office; but the king refus’d,
      Deaf to their cries, nor would the gates unbar
      Of sacred peace, or loose th’ imprison’d war;
      But hid his head, and, safe from loud alarms,
      Abhorr’d the wicked ministry of arms.
      Then heav’n’s imperious queen shot down from high:
      At her approach the brazen hinges fly;
      The gates are forc’d, and ev’ry falling bar;
      And, like a tempest, issues out the war.

      The peaceful cities of th’ Ausonian shore,
      Lull’d in their ease, and undisturb’d before,
      Are all on fire; and some, with studious care,
      Their restiff steeds in sandy plains prepare;
      Some their soft limbs in painful marches try,
      And war is all their wish, and arms the gen’ral cry.
      Part scour the rusty shields with seam; and part
      New grind the blunted ax, and point the dart:
      With joy they view the waving ensigns fly,
      And hear the trumpet’s clangour pierce the sky.
      Five cities forge their arms: th’ Atinian pow’rs,
      Antemnae, Tibur with her lofty tow’rs,
      Ardea the proud, the Crustumerian town:
      All these of old were places of renown.
      Some hammer helmets for the fighting field;
      Some twine young sallows to support the shield;
      The croslet some, and some the cuishes mould,
      With silver plated, and with ductile gold.
      The rustic honours of the scythe and share
      Give place to swords and plumes, the pride of war.
      Old falchions are new temper’d in the fires;
      The sounding trumpet ev’ry soul inspires.
      The word is giv’n; with eager speed they lace
      The shining headpiece, and the shield embrace.
      The neighing steeds are to the chariot tied;
      The trusty weapon sits on ev’ry side.

      And now the mighty labour is begun
      Ye Muses, open all your Helicon.
      Sing you the chiefs that sway’d th’ Ausonian land,
      Their arms, and armies under their command;
      What warriors in our ancient clime were bred;
      What soldiers follow’d, and what heroes led.
      For well you know, and can record alone,
      What fame to future times conveys but darkly down.
      Mezentius first appear’d upon the plain:
      Scorn sate upon his brows, and sour disdain,
      Defying earth and heav’n. Etruria lost,
      He brings to Turnus’ aid his baffled host.
      The charming Lausus, full of youthful fire,
      Rode in the rank, and next his sullen sire;
      To Turnus only second in the grace
      Of manly mien, and features of the face.
      A skilful horseman, and a huntsman bred,
      With fates averse a thousand men he led:
      His sire unworthy of so brave a son;
      Himself well worthy of a happier throne.

      Next Aventinus drives his chariot round
      The Latian plains, with palms and laurels crown’d.
      Proud of his steeds, he smokes along the field;
      His father’s hydra fills his ample shield:
      A hundred serpents hiss about the brims;
      The son of Hercules he justly seems
      By his broad shoulders and gigantic limbs;
      Of heav’nly part, and part of earthly blood,
      A mortal woman mixing with a god.
      For strong Alcides, after he had slain
      The triple Geryon, drove from conquer’d Spain
      His captive herds; and, thence in triumph led,
      On Tuscan Tiber’s flow’ry banks they fed.
      Then on Mount Aventine the son of Jove
      The priestess Rhea found, and forc’d to love.
      For arms, his men long piles and jav’lins bore;
      And poles with pointed steel their foes in battle gore.
      Like Hercules himself his son appears,
      In salvage pomp; a lion’s hide he wears;
      About his shoulders hangs the shaggy skin;
      The teeth and gaping jaws severely grin.
      Thus, like the god his father, homely dress’d,
      He strides into the hall, a horrid guest.

      Then two twin brothers from fair Tibur came,
      (Which from their brother Tiburs took the name,)
      Fierce Coras and Catillus, void of fear:
      Arm’d Argive horse they led, and in the front appear.
      Like cloud-born Centaurs, from the mountain’s height
      With rapid course descending to the fight;
      They rush along; the rattling woods give way;
      The branches bend before their sweepy sway.

      Nor was Praeneste’s founder wanting there,
      Whom fame reports the son of Mulciber:
      Found in the fire, and foster’d in the plains,
      A shepherd and a king at once he reigns,
      And leads to Turnus’ aid his country swains.
      His own Praeneste sends a chosen band,
      With those who plow Saturnia’s Gabine land;
      Besides the succour which cold Anien yields,
      The rocks of Hernicus, and dewy fields,
      Anagnia fat, and Father Amasene—
      A num’rous rout, but all of naked men:
      Nor arms they wear, nor swords and bucklers wield,
      Nor drive the chariot thro’ the dusty field,
      But whirl from leathern slings huge balls of lead,
      And spoils of yellow wolves adorn their head;
      The left foot naked, when they march to fight,
      But in a bull’s raw hide they sheathe the right.
      Messapus next, (great Neptune was his sire,)
      Secure of steel, and fated from the fire,
      In pomp appears, and with his ardour warms
      A heartless train, unexercis’d in arms:
      The just Faliscans he to battle brings,
      And those who live where Lake Ciminius springs;
      And where Feronia’s grove and temple stands,
      Who till Fescennian or Flavinian lands.
      All these in order march, and marching sing
      The warlike actions of their sea-born king;
      Like a long team of snowy swans on high,
      Which clap their wings, and cleave the liquid sky,
      When, homeward from their wat’ry pastures borne,
      They sing, and Asia’s lakes their notes return.
      Not one who heard their music from afar,
      Would think these troops an army train’d to war,
      But flocks of fowl, that, when the tempests roar,
      With their hoarse gabbling seek the silent shore.

      Then Clausus came, who led a num’rous band
      Of troops embodied from the Sabine land,
      And, in himself alone, an army brought.
      ’Twas he, the noble Claudian race begot,
      The Claudian race, ordain’d, in times to come,
      To share the greatness of imperial Rome.
      He led the Cures forth, of old renown,
      Mutuscans from their olive-bearing town,
      And all th’ Eretian pow’rs; besides a band
      That follow’d from Velinum’s dewy land,
      And Amiternian troops, of mighty fame,
      And mountaineers, that from Severus came,
      And from the craggy cliffs of Tetrica,
      And those where yellow Tiber takes his way,
      And where Himella’s wanton waters play.
      Casperia sends her arms, with those that lie
      By Fabaris, and fruitful Foruli:
      The warlike aids of Horta next appear,
      And the cold Nursians come to close the rear,
      Mix’d with the natives born of Latine blood,
      Whom Allia washes with her fatal flood.
      Not thicker billows beat the Libyan main,
      When pale Orion sets in wintry rain;
      Nor thicker harvests on rich Hermus rise,
      Or Lycian fields, when Phoebus burns the skies,
      Than stand these troops: their bucklers ring around;
      Their trampling turns the turf, and shakes the solid ground.

      High in his chariot then Halesus came,
      A foe by birth to Troy’s unhappy name:
      From Agamemnon born—to Turnus’ aid
      A thousand men the youthful hero led,
      Who till the Massic soil, for wine renown’d,
      And fierce Auruncans from their hilly ground,
      And those who live by Sidicinian shores,
      And where with shoaly fords Vulturnus roars,
      Cales’ and Osca’s old inhabitants,
      And rough Saticulans, inur’d to wants:
      Light demi-lances from afar they throw,
      Fasten’d with leathern thongs, to gall the foe.
      Short crooked swords in closer fight they wear;
      And on their warding arm light bucklers bear.

      Nor Oebalus, shalt thou be left unsung,
      From nymph Semethis and old Telon sprung,
      Who then in Teleboan Capri reign’d;
      But that short isle th’ ambitious youth disdain’d,
      And o’er Campania stretch’d his ample sway,
      Where swelling Sarnus seeks the Tyrrhene sea;
      O’er Batulum, and where Abella sees,
      From her high tow’rs, the harvest of her trees.
      And these (as was the Teuton use of old)
      Wield brazen swords, and brazen bucklers hold;
      Sling weighty stones, when from afar they fight;
      Their casques are cork, a covering thick and light.

      Next these in rank, the warlike Ufens went,
      And led the mountain troops that Nursia sent.
      The rude Equicolae his rule obey’d;
      Hunting their sport, and plund’ring was their trade.
      In arms they plow’d, to battle still prepar’d:
      Their soil was barren, and their hearts were hard.

      Umbro the priest the proud Marrubians led,
      By King Archippus sent to Turnus’ aid,
      And peaceful olives crown’d his hoary head.
      His wand and holy words, the viper’s rage,
      And venom’d wounds of serpents could assuage.
      He, when he pleas’d with powerful juice to steep
      Their temples, shut their eyes in pleasing sleep.
      But vain were Marsian herbs, and magic art,
      To cure the wound giv’n by the Dardan dart:
      Yet his untimely fate th’ Angitian woods
      In sighs remurmur’d to the Fucine floods.

      The son of fam’d Hippolytus was there,
      Fam’d as his sire, and, as his mother, fair;
      Whom in Egerian groves Aricia bore,
      And nurs’d his youth along the marshy shore,
      Where great Diana’s peaceful altars flame,
      In fruitful fields; and Virbius was his name.
      Hippolytus, as old records have said,
      Was by his stepdam sought to share her bed;
      But, when no female arts his mind could move,
      She turn’d to furious hate her impious love.
      Torn by wild horses on the sandy shore,
      Another’s crimes th’ unhappy hunter bore,
      Glutting his father’s eyes with guiltless gore.
      But chaste Diana, who his death deplor’d,
      With Aesculapian herbs his life restor’d.
      Then Jove, who saw from high, with just disdain,
      The dead inspir’d with vital breath again,
      Struck to the centre, with his flaming dart,
      Th’ unhappy founder of the godlike art.
      But Trivia kept in secret shades alone
      Her care, Hippolytus, to fate unknown;
      And call’d him Virbius in th’ Egerian grove,
      Where then he liv’d obscure, but safe from Jove.
      For this, from Trivia’s temple and her wood
      Are coursers driv’n, who shed their master’s blood,
      Affrighted by the monsters of the flood.
      His son, the second Virbius, yet retain’d
      His father’s art, and warrior steeds he rein’d.

      Amid the troops, and like the leading god,
      High o’er the rest in arms the graceful Turnus rode:
      A triple of plumes his crest adorn’d,
      On which with belching flames Chimaera burn’d:
      The more the kindled combat rises high’r,
      The more with fury burns the blazing fire.
      Fair Io grac’d his shield; but Io now
      With horns exalted stands, and seems to low—
      A noble charge! Her keeper by her side,
      To watch her walks, his hundred eyes applied;
      And on the brims her sire, the wat’ry god,
      Roll’d from a silver urn his crystal flood.
      A cloud of foot succeeds, and fills the fields
      With swords, and pointed spears, and clatt’ring shields;
      Of Argives, and of old Sicanian bands,
      And those who plow the rich Rutulian lands;
      Auruncan youth, and those Sacrana yields,
      And the proud Labicans, with painted shields,
      And those who near Numician streams reside,
      And those whom Tiber’s holy forests hide,
      Or Circe’s hills from the main land divide;
      Where Ufens glides along the lowly lands,
      Or the black water of Pomptina stands.

      Last, from the Volscians fair Camilla came,
      And led her warlike troops, a warrior dame;
      Unbred to spinning, in the loom unskill’d,
      She chose the nobler Pallas of the field.
      Mix’d with the first, the fierce Virago fought,
      Sustain’d the toils of arms, the danger sought,
      Outstripp’d the winds in speed upon the plain,
      Flew o’er the fields, nor hurt the bearded grain:
      She swept the seas, and, as she skimm’d along,
      Her flying feet unbath’d on billows hung.
      Men, boys, and women, stupid with surprise,
      Where’er she passes, fix their wond’ring eyes:
      Longing they look, and, gaping at the sight,
      Devour her o’er and o’er with vast delight;
      Her purple habit sits with such a grace
      On her smooth shoulders, and so suits her face;
      Her head with ringlets of her hair is crown’d,
      And in a golden caul the curls are bound.
      She shakes her myrtle jav’lin; and, behind,
      Her Lycian quiver dances in the wind.




      When Turnus had assembled all his pow’rs,
      His standard planted on Laurentum’s tow’rs;
      When now the sprightly trumpet, from afar,
      Had giv’n the signal of approaching war,
      Had rous’d the neighing steeds to scour the fields,
      While the fierce riders clatter’d on their shields;
      Trembling with rage, the Latian youth prepare
      To join th’ allies, and headlong rush to war.
      Fierce Ufens, and Messapus, led the crowd,
      With bold Mezentius, who blasphem’d aloud.
      These thro’ the country took their wasteful course,
      The fields to forage, and to gather force.
      Then Venulus to Diomede they send,
      To beg his aid Ausonia to defend,
      Declare the common danger, and inform
      The Grecian leader of the growing storm:
      “Aeneas, landed on the Latian coast,
      With banish’d gods, and with a baffled host,
      Yet now aspir’d to conquest of the state,
      And claim’d a title from the gods and fate;
      What num’rous nations in his quarrel came,
      And how they spread his formidable name.
      What he design’d, what mischief might arise,
      If fortune favour’d his first enterprise,
      Was left for him to weigh, whose equal fears,
      And common interest, was involv’d in theirs.”

      While Turnus and th’ allies thus urge the war,
      The Trojan, floating in a flood of care,
      Beholds the tempest which his foes prepare.
      This way and that he turns his anxious mind;
      Thinks, and rejects the counsels he design’d;
      Explores himself in vain, in ev’ry part,
      And gives no rest to his distracted heart.
      So, when the sun by day, or moon by night,
      Strike on the polish’d brass their trembling light,
      The glitt’ring species here and there divide,
      And cast their dubious beams from side to side;
      Now on the walls, now on the pavement play,
      And to the ceiling flash the glaring day.

      ’Twas night; and weary nature lull’d asleep
      The birds of air, and fishes of the deep,
      And beasts, and mortal men. The Trojan chief
      Was laid on Tiber’s banks, oppress’d with grief,
      And found in silent slumber late relief.
      Then, thro’ the shadows of the poplar wood,
      Arose the father of the Roman flood;
      An azure robe was o’er his body spread,
      A wreath of shady reeds adorn’d his head:
      Thus, manifest to sight, the god appear’d,
      And with these pleasing words his sorrow cheer’d:
      “Undoubted offspring of ethereal race,
      O long expected in this promis’d place!
      Who thro’ the foes hast borne thy banish’d gods,
      Restor’d them to their hearths, and old abodes;
      This is thy happy home, the clime where fate
      Ordains thee to restore the Trojan state.
      Fear not! The war shall end in lasting peace,
      And all the rage of haughty Juno cease.
      And that this nightly vision may not seem
      Th’ effect of fancy, or an idle dream,
      A sow beneath an oak shall lie along,
      All white herself, and white her thirty young.
      When thirty rolling years have run their race,
      Thy son Ascanius, on this empty space,
      Shall build a royal town, of lasting fame,
      Which from this omen shall receive the name.
      Time shall approve the truth. For what remains,
      And how with sure success to crown thy pains,
      With patience next attend. A banish’d band,
      Driv’n with Evander from th’ Arcadian land,
      Have planted here, and plac’d on high their walls;
      Their town the founder Pallanteum calls,
      Deriv’d from Pallas, his great-grandsire’s name:
      But the fierce Latians old possession claim,
      With war infesting the new colony.
      These make thy friends, and on their aid rely.
      To thy free passage I submit my streams.
      Wake, son of Venus, from thy pleasing dreams;
      And, when the setting stars are lost in day,
      To Juno’s pow’r thy just devotion pay;
      With sacrifice the wrathful queen appease:
      Her pride at length shall fall, her fury cease.
      When thou return’st victorious from the war,
      Perform thy vows to me with grateful care.
      The god am I, whose yellow water flows
      Around these fields, and fattens as it goes:
      Tiber my name; among the rolling floods
      Renown’d on earth, esteem’d among the gods.
      This is my certain seat. In times to come,
      My waves shall wash the walls of mighty Rome.”

      He said, and plung’d below. While yet he spoke,
      His dream Aeneas and his sleep forsook.
      He rose, and looking up, beheld the skies
      With purple blushing, and the day arise.
      Then water in his hollow palm he took
      From Tiber’s flood, and thus the pow’rs bespoke:
      “Laurentian nymphs, by whom the streams are fed,
      And Father Tiber, in thy sacred bed
      Receive Aeneas, and from danger keep.
      Whatever fount, whatever holy deep,
      Conceals thy wat’ry stores; where’er they rise,
      And, bubbling from below, salute the skies;
      Thou, king of horned floods, whose plenteous urn
      Suffices fatness to the fruitful corn,
      For this thy kind compassion of our woes,
      Shalt share my morning song and ev’ning vows.
      But, O be present to thy people’s aid,
      And firm the gracious promise thou hast made!”
      Thus having said, two galleys from his stores,
      With care he chooses, mans, and fits with oars.
      Now on the shore the fatal swine is found.
      Wond’rous to tell!—She lay along the ground:
      Her well-fed offspring at her udders hung;
      She white herself, and white her thirty young.
      Aeneas takes the mother and her brood,
      And all on Juno’s altar are bestow’d.

      The foll’wing night, and the succeeding day,
      Propitious Tiber smooth’d his wat’ry way:
      He roll’d his river back, and pois’d he stood,
      A gentle swelling, and a peaceful flood.
      The Trojans mount their ships; they put from shore,
      Borne on the waves, and scarcely dip an oar.
      Shouts from the land give omen to their course,
      And the pitch’d vessels glide with easy force.
      The woods and waters wonder at the gleam
      Of shields, and painted ships that stem the stream.
      One summer’s night and one whole day they pass
      Betwixt the greenwood shades, and cut the liquid glass.
      The fiery sun had finish’d half his race,
      Look’d back, and doubted in the middle space,
      When they from far beheld the rising tow’rs,
      The tops of sheds, and shepherds’ lowly bow’rs,
      Thin as they stood, which, then of homely clay,
      Now rise in marble, from the Roman sway.
      These cots (Evander’s kingdom, mean and poor)
      The Trojan saw, and turn’d his ships to shore.
      ’Twas on a solemn day: th’ Arcadian states,
      The king and prince, without the city gates,
      Then paid their off’rings in a sacred grove
      To Hercules, the warrior son of Jove.
      Thick clouds of rolling smoke involve the skies,
      And fat of entrails on his altar fries.

      But, when they saw the ships that stemm’d the flood,
      And glitter’d thro’ the covert of the wood,
      They rose with fear, and left th’ unfinish’d feast,
      Till dauntless Pallas reassur’d the rest
      To pay the rites. Himself without delay
      A jav’lin seiz’d, and singly took his way;
      Then gain’d a rising ground, and call’d from far:
      “Resolve me, strangers, whence, and what you are;
      Your bus’ness here; and bring you peace or war?”
      High on the stern Aeneas took his stand,
      And held a branch of olive in his hand,
      While thus he spoke: “The Phrygians’ arms you see,
      Expell’d from Troy, provok’d in Italy
      By Latian foes, with war unjustly made;
      At first affianc’d, and at last betray’d.
      This message bear: ‘The Trojans and their chief
      Bring holy peace, and beg the king’s relief.’
      Struck with so great a name, and all on fire,
      The youth replies: “Whatever you require,
      Your fame exacts. Upon our shores descend.
      A welcome guest, and, what you wish, a friend.”
      He said, and, downward hasting to the strand,
      Embrac’d the stranger prince, and join’d his hand.

      Conducted to the grove, Aeneas broke
      The silence first, and thus the king bespoke:
      “Best of the Greeks, to whom, by fate’s command,
      I bear these peaceful branches in my hand,
      Undaunted I approach you, tho’ I know
      Your birth is Grecian, and your land my foe;
      From Atreus tho’ your ancient lineage came,
      And both the brother kings your kindred claim;
      Yet, my self-conscious worth, your high renown,
      Your virtue, thro’ the neighb’ring nations blown,
      Our fathers’ mingled blood, Apollo’s voice,
      Have led me hither, less by need than choice.
      Our founder Dardanus, as fame has sung,
      And Greeks acknowledge, from Electra sprung:
      Electra from the loins of Atlas came;
      Atlas, whose head sustains the starry frame.
      Your sire is Mercury, whom long before
      On cold Cyllene’s top fair Maia bore.
      Maia the fair, on fame if we rely,
      Was Atlas’ daughter, who sustains the sky.
      Thus from one common source our streams divide;
      Ours is the Trojan, yours th’ Arcadian side.
      Rais’d by these hopes, I sent no news before,
      Nor ask’d your leave, nor did your faith implore;
      But come, without a pledge, my own ambassador.
      The same Rutulians, who with arms pursue
      The Trojan race, are equal foes to you.
      Our host expell’d, what farther force can stay
      The victor troops from universal sway?
      Then will they stretch their pow’r athwart the land,
      And either sea from side to side command.
      Receive our offer’d faith, and give us thine;
      Ours is a gen’rous and experienc’d line:
      We want not hearts nor bodies for the war;
      In council cautious, and in fields we dare.”

      He said; and while spoke, with piercing eyes
      Evander view’d the man with vast surprise,
      Pleas’d with his action, ravish’d with his face:
      Then answer’d briefly, with a royal grace:
      “O valiant leader of the Trojan line,
      In whom the features of thy father shine,
      How I recall Anchises! how I see
      His motions, mien, and all my friend, in thee!
      Long tho’ it be, ’tis fresh within my mind,
      When Priam to his sister’s court design’d
      A welcome visit, with a friendly stay,
      And thro’ th’ Arcadian kingdom took his way.
      Then, past a boy, the callow down began
      To shade my chin, and call me first a man.
      I saw the shining train with vast delight,
      And Priam’s goodly person pleas’d my sight:
      But great Anchises, far above the rest,
      With awful wonder fir’d my youthful breast.
      I long’d to join in friendship’s holy bands
      Our mutual hearts, and plight our mutual hands.
      I first accosted him: I sued, I sought,
      And, with a loving force, to Pheneus brought.
      He gave me, when at length constrain’d to go,
      A Lycian quiver and a Gnossian bow,
      A vest embroider’d, glorious to behold,
      And two rich bridles, with their bits of gold,
      Which my son’s coursers in obedience hold.
      The league you ask, I offer, as your right;
      And, when tomorrow’s sun reveals the light,
      With swift supplies you shall be sent away.
      Now celebrate with us this solemn day,
      Whose holy rites admit no long delay.
      Honour our annual feast; and take your seat,
      With friendly welcome, at a homely treat.”
      Thus having said, the bowls remov’d (for fear)
      The youths replac’d, and soon restor’d the cheer.
      On sods of turf he set the soldiers round:
      A maple throne, rais’d higher from the ground,
      Receiv’d the Trojan chief; and, o’er the bed,
      A lion’s shaggy hide for ornament they spread.
      The loaves were serv’d in canisters; the wine
      In bowls; the priest renew’d the rites divine:
      Broil’d entrails are their food, and beef’s continued chine.

      But when the rage of hunger was repress’d,
      Thus spoke Evander to his royal guest:
      “These rites, these altars, and this feast, O king,
      From no vain fears or superstition spring,
      Or blind devotion, or from blinder chance,
      Or heady zeal, or brutal ignorance;
      But, sav’d from danger, with a grateful sense,
      The labours of a god we recompense.
      See, from afar, yon rock that mates the sky,
      About whose feet such heaps of rubbish lie;
      Such indigested ruin; bleak and bare,
      How desert now it stands, expos’d in air!
      ’Twas once a robber’s den, inclos’d around
      With living stone, and deep beneath the ground.
      The monster Cacus, more than half a beast,
      This hold, impervious to the sun, possess’d.
      The pavement ever foul with human gore;
      Heads, and their mangled members, hung the door.
      Vulcan this plague begot; and, like his sire,
      Black clouds he belch’d, and flakes of livid fire.
      Time, long expected, eas’d us of our load,
      And brought the needful presence of a god.
      Th’ avenging force of Hercules, from Spain,
      Arriv’d in triumph, from Geryon slain:
      Thrice liv’d the giant, and thrice liv’d in vain.
      His prize, the lowing herds, Alcides drove
      Near Tiber’s bank, to graze the shady grove.
      Allur’d with hope of plunder, and intent
      By force to rob, by fraud to circumvent,
      The brutal Cacus, as by chance they stray’d,
      Four oxen thence, and four fair kine convey’d;
      And, lest the printed footsteps might be seen,
      He dragg’d ’em backwards to his rocky den.
      The tracks averse a lying notice gave,
      And led the searcher backward from the cave.

      “Meantime the herdsman hero shifts his place,
      To find fresh pasture and untrodden grass.
      The beasts, who miss’d their mates, fill’d all around
      With bellowings, and the rocks restor’d the sound.
      One heifer, who had heard her love complain,
      Roar’d from the cave, and made the project vain.
      Alcides found the fraud; with rage he shook,
      And toss’d about his head his knotted oak.
      Swift as the winds, or Scythian arrows’ flight,
      He clomb, with eager haste, th’ aerial height.
      Then first we saw the monster mend his pace;
      Fear in his eyes, and paleness in his face,
      Confess’d the god’s approach. Trembling he springs,
      As terror had increas’d his feet with wings;
      Nor stay’d for stairs; but down the depth he threw
      His body, on his back the door he drew
      (The door, a rib of living rock; with pains
      His father hew’d it out, and bound with iron chains):
      He broke the heavy links, the mountain clos’d,
      And bars and levers to his foe oppos’d.
      The wretch had hardly made his dungeon fast;
      The fierce avenger came with bounding haste;
      Survey’d the mouth of the forbidden hold,
      And here and there his raging eyes he roll’d.
      He gnash’d his teeth; and thrice he compass’d round
      With winged speed the circuit of the ground.
      Thrice at the cavern’s mouth he pull’d in vain,
      And, panting, thrice desisted from his pain.
      A pointed flinty rock, all bare and black,
      Grew gibbous from behind the mountain’s back;
      Owls, ravens, all ill omens of the night,
      Here built their nests, and hither wing’d their flight.
      The leaning head hung threat’ning o’er the flood,
      And nodded to the left. The hero stood
      Adverse, with planted feet, and, from the right,
      Tugg’d at the solid stone with all his might.
      Thus heav’d, the fix’d foundations of the rock
      Gave way; heav’n echo’d at the rattling shock.
      Tumbling, it chok’d the flood: on either side
      The banks leap backward, and the streams divide;
      The sky shrunk upward with unusual dread,
      And trembling Tiber div’d beneath his bed.
      The court of Cacus stands reveal’d to sight;
      The cavern glares with new-admitted light.
      So the pent vapours, with a rumbling sound,
      Heave from below, and rend the hollow ground;
      A sounding flaw succeeds; and, from on high,
      The gods with hate beheld the nether sky:
      The ghosts repine at violated night,
      And curse th’ invading sun, and sicken at the sight.
      The graceless monster, caught in open day,
      Inclos’d, and in despair to fly away,
      Howls horrible from underneath, and fills
      His hollow palace with unmanly yells.
      The hero stands above, and from afar
      Plies him with darts, and stones, and distant war.
      He, from his nostrils huge mouth, expires
      Black clouds of smoke, amidst his father’s fires,
      Gath’ring, with each repeated blast, the night,
      To make uncertain aim, and erring sight.
      The wrathful god then plunges from above,
      And, where in thickest waves the sparkles drove,
      There lights; and wades thro’ fumes, and gropes his way,
      Half sing’d, half stifled, till he grasps his prey.
      The monster, spewing fruitless flames, he found;
      He squeez’d his throat; he writh’d his neck around,
      And in a knot his crippled members bound;
      Then from their sockets tore his burning eyes:
      Roll’d on a heap, the breathless robber lies.
      The doors, unbarr’d, receive the rushing day,
      And thoro’ lights disclose the ravish’d prey.
      The bulls, redeem’d, breathe open air again.
      Next, by the feet, they drag him from his den.
      The wond’ring neighbourhood, with glad surprise,
      Behold his shagged breast, his giant size,
      His mouth that flames no more, and his extinguish’d eyes.
      From that auspicious day, with rites divine,
      We worship at the hero’s holy shrine.
      Potitius first ordain’d these annual vows:
      As priests, were added the Pinarian house,
      Who rais’d this altar in the sacred shade,
      Where honours, ever due, for ever shall be paid.
      For these deserts, and this high virtue shown,
      Ye warlike youths, your heads with garlands crown:
      Fill high the goblets with a sparkling flood,
      And with deep draughts invoke our common god.”

      This said, a double wreath Evander twin’d,
      And poplars black and white his temples bind.
      Then brims his ample bowl. With like design
      The rest invoke the gods, with sprinkled wine.
      Meantime the sun descended from the skies,
      And the bright evening star began to rise.
      And now the priests, Potitius at their head,
      In skins of beasts involv’d, the long procession led;
      Held high the flaming tapers in their hands,
      As custom had prescrib’d their holy bands;
      Then with a second course the tables load,
      And with full chargers offer to the god.
      The Salii sing, and cense his altars round
      With Saban smoke, their heads with poplar bound
      One choir of old, another of the young,
      To dance, and bear the burthen of the song.
      The lay records the labours, and the praise,
      And all th’ immortal acts of Hercules:
      First, how the mighty babe, when swath’d in bands,
      The serpents strangled with his infant hands;
      Then, as in years and matchless force he grew,
      Th’ Oechalian walls, and Trojan, overthrew.
      Besides, a thousand hazards they relate,
      Procur’d by Juno’s and Eurystheus’ hate:
      “Thy hands, unconquer’d hero, could subdue
      The cloud-born Centaurs, and the monster crew:
      Nor thy resistless arm the bull withstood,
      Nor he, the roaring terror of the wood.
      The triple porter of the Stygian seat,
      With lolling tongue, lay fawning at thy feet,
      And, seiz’d with fear, forgot his mangled meat.
      Th’ infernal waters trembled at thy sight;
      Thee, god, no face of danger could affright;
      Not huge Typhoeus, nor th’ unnumber’d snake,
      Increas’d with hissing heads, in Lerna’s lake.
      Hail, Jove’s undoubted son! an added grace
      To heav’n and the great author of thy race!
      Receive the grateful off’rings which we pay,
      And smile propitious on thy solemn day!”
      In numbers thus they sung; above the rest,
      The den and death of Cacus crown the feast.
      The woods to hollow vales convey the sound,
      The vales to hills, and hills the notes rebound.
      The rites perform’d, the cheerful train retire.

      Betwixt young Pallas and his aged sire,
      The Trojan pass’d, the city to survey,
      And pleasing talk beguil’d the tedious way.
      The stranger cast around his curious eyes,
      New objects viewing still, with new surprise;
      With greedy joy enquires of various things,
      And acts and monuments of ancient kings.
      Then thus the founder of the Roman tow’rs:
      “These woods were first the seat of sylvan pow’rs,
      Of Nymphs and Fauns, and salvage men, who took
      Their birth from trunks of trees and stubborn oak.
      Nor laws they knew, nor manners, nor the care
      Of lab’ring oxen, or the shining share,
      Nor arts of gain, nor what they gain’d to spare.
      Their exercise the chase; the running flood
      Supplied their thirst, the trees supplied their food.
      Then Saturn came, who fled the pow’r of Jove,
      Robb’d of his realms, and banish’d from above.
      The men, dispers’d on hills, to towns he brought,
      And laws ordain’d, and civil customs taught,
      And Latium call’d the land where safe he lay
      From his unduteous son, and his usurping sway.
      With his mild empire, peace and plenty came;
      And hence the golden times deriv’d their name.
      A more degenerate and discolour’d age
      Succeeded this, with avarice and rage.
      Th’ Ausonians then, and bold Sicanians came;
      And Saturn’s empire often chang’d the name.
      Then kings, gigantic Tybris, and the rest,
      With arbitrary sway the land oppress’d:
      For Tiber’s flood was Albula before,
      Till, from the tyrant’s fate, his name it bore.
      I last arriv’d, driv’n from my native home
      By fortune’s pow’r, and fate’s resistless doom.
      Long toss’d on seas, I sought this happy land,
      Warn’d by my mother nymph, and call’d by Heav’n’s command.”

      Thus, walking on, he spoke, and shew’d the gate,
      Since call’d Carmental by the Roman state;
      Where stood an altar, sacred to the name
      Of old Carmenta, the prophetic dame,
      Who to her son foretold th’ Aenean race,
      Sublime in fame, and Rome’s imperial place:
      Then shews the forest, which, in after times,
      Fierce Romulus for perpetrated crimes
      A sacred refuge made; with this, the shrine
      Where Pan below the rock had rites divine:
      Then tells of Argus’ death, his murder’d guest,
      Whose grave and tomb his innocence attest.
      Thence, to the steep Tarpeian rock he leads;
      Now roof’d with gold, then thatch’d with homely reeds.
      A reverent fear (such superstition reigns
      Among the rude) ev’n then possess’d the swains.
      Some god, they knew—what god, they could not tell—
      Did there amidst the sacred horror dwell.
      Th’ Arcadians thought him Jove; and said they saw
      The mighty Thund’rer with majestic awe,
      Who took his shield, and dealt his bolts around,
      And scatter’d tempests on the teeming ground.
      Then saw two heaps of ruins, (once they stood
      Two stately towns, on either side the flood,)
      Saturnia’s and Janiculum’s remains;
      And either place the founder’s name retains.
      Discoursing thus together, they resort
      Where poor Evander kept his country court.
      They view’d the ground of Rome’s litigious hall;
      (Once oxen low’d, where now the lawyers bawl;)
      Then, stooping, thro’ the narrow gate they press’d,
      When thus the king bespoke his Trojan guest:
      “Mean as it is, this palace, and this door,
      Receiv’d Alcides, then a conqueror.
      Dare to be poor; accept our homely food,
      Which feasted him, and emulate a god.”
      Then underneath a lowly roof he led
      The weary prince, and laid him on a bed;
      The stuffing leaves, with hides of bears o’erspread.
      Now night had shed her silver dews around,
      And with her sable wings embrac’d the ground,
      When love’s fair goddess, anxious for her son,
      (New tumults rising, and new wars begun,)
      Couch’d with her husband in his golden bed,
      With these alluring words invokes his aid;
      And, that her pleasing speech his mind may move,
      Inspires each accent with the charms of love:
      “While cruel fate conspir’d with Grecian pow’rs,
      To level with the ground the Trojan tow’rs,
      I ask’d not aid th’ unhappy to restore,
      Nor did the succour of thy skill implore;
      Nor urg’d the labours of my lord in vain,
      A sinking empire longer to sustain,
      Tho’ much I ow’d to Priam’s house, and more
      The dangers of Aeneas did deplore.
      But now, by Jove’s command, and fate’s decree,
      His race is doom’d to reign in Italy:
      With humble suit I beg thy needful art,
      O still propitious pow’r, that rules my heart!
      A mother kneels a suppliant for her son.
      By Thetis and Aurora thou wert won
      To forge impenetrable shields, and grace
      With fated arms a less illustrious race.
      Behold, what haughty nations are combin’d
      Against the relics of the Phrygian kind,
      With fire and sword my people to destroy,
      And conquer Venus twice, in conqu’ring Troy.”
      She said; and straight her arms, of snowy hue,
      About her unresolving husband threw.
      Her soft embraces soon infuse desire;
      His bones and marrow sudden warmth inspire;
      And all the godhead feels the wonted fire.
      Not half so swift the rattling thunder flies,
      Or forky lightnings flash along the skies.
      The goddess, proud of her successful wiles,
      And conscious of her form, in secret smiles.

      Then thus the pow’r, obnoxious to her charms,
      Panting, and half dissolving in her arms:
      “Why seek you reasons for a cause so just,
      Or your own beauties or my love distrust?
      Long since, had you requir’d my helpful hand,
      Th’ artificer and art you might command,
      To labour arms for Troy: nor Jove, nor fate,
      Confin’d their empire to so short a date.
      And, if you now desire new wars to wage,
      My skill I promise, and my pains engage.
      Whatever melting metals can conspire,
      Or breathing bellows, or the forming fire,
      Is freely yours: your anxious fears remove,
      And think no task is difficult to love.”
      Trembling he spoke; and, eager of her charms,
      He snatch’d the willing goddess to his arms;
      Till in her lap infus’d, he lay possess’d
      Of full desire, and sunk to pleasing rest.
      Now when the night her middle race had rode,
      And his first slumber had refresh’d the god—
      The time when early housewives leave the bed;
      When living embers on the hearth they spread,
      Supply the lamp, and call the maids to rise;—
      With yawning mouths, and with half-open’d eyes,
      They ply the distaff by the winking light,
      And to their daily labour add the night:
      Thus frugally they earn their children’s bread,
      And uncorrupted keep the nuptial bed—
      Not less concern’d, nor at a later hour,
      Rose from his downy couch the forging pow’r.

      Sacred to Vulcan’s name, an isle there lay,
      Betwixt Sicilia’s coasts and Lipare,
      Rais’d high on smoking rocks; and, deep below,
      In hollow caves the fires of Aetna glow.
      The Cyclops here their heavy hammers deal;
      Loud strokes, and hissings of tormented steel,
      Are heard around; the boiling waters roar,
      And smoky flames thro’ fuming tunnels soar.
      Hither the Father of the Fire, by night,
      Thro’ the brown air precipitates his flight.
      On their eternal anvils here he found
      The brethren beating, and the blows go round.
      A load of pointless thunder now there lies
      Before their hands, to ripen for the skies:
      These darts, for angry Jove, they daily cast;
      Consum’d on mortals with prodigious waste.
      Three rays of writhen rain, of fire three more,
      Of winged southern winds and cloudy store
      As many parts, the dreadful mixture frame;
      And fears are added, and avenging flame.
      Inferior ministers, for Mars, repair
      His broken axletrees and blunted war,
      And send him forth again with furbish’d arms,
      To wake the lazy war with trumpets’ loud alarms.
      The rest refresh the scaly snakes that fold
      The shield of Pallas, and renew their gold.
      Full on the crest the Gorgon’s head they place,
      With eyes that roll in death, and with distorted face.

      “My sons,” said Vulcan, “set your tasks aside;
      Your strength and master-skill must now be tried.
      Arms for a hero forge; arms that require
      Your force, your speed, and all your forming fire.”
      He said. They set their former work aside,
      And their new toils with eager haste divide.
      A flood of molten silver, brass, and gold,
      And deadly steel, in the large furnace roll’d;
      Of this, their artful hands a shield prepare,
      Alone sufficient to sustain the war.
      Sev’n orbs within a spacious round they close:
      One stirs the fire, and one the bellows blows.
      The hissing steel is in the smithy drown’d;
      The grot with beaten anvils groans around.
      By turns their arms advance, in equal time;
      By turns their hands descend, and hammers chime.
      They turn the glowing mass with crooked tongs;
      The fiery work proceeds, with rustic songs.

      While, at the Lemnian god’s command, they urge
      Their labours thus, and ply th’ Aeolian forge,
      The cheerful morn salutes Evander’s eyes,
      And songs of chirping birds invite to rise.
      He leaves his lowly bed: his buskins meet
      Above his ankles; sandals sheathe his feet:
      He sets his trusty sword upon his side,
      And o’er his shoulder throws a panther’s hide.
      Two menial dogs before their master press’d.
      Thus clad, and guarded thus, he seeks his kingly guest.
      Mindful of promis’d aid, he mends his pace,
      But meets Aeneas in the middle space.
      Young Pallas did his father’s steps attend,
      And true Achates waited on his friend.
      They join their hands; a secret seat they choose;
      Th’ Arcadian first their former talk renews:
      “Undaunted prince, I never can believe
      The Trojan empire lost, while you survive.
      Command th’ assistance of a faithful friend;
      But feeble are the succours I can send.
      Our narrow kingdom here the Tiber bounds;
      That other side the Latian state surrounds,
      Insults our walls, and wastes our fruitful grounds.
      But mighty nations I prepare, to join
      Their arms with yours, and aid your just design.
      You come, as by your better genius sent,
      And fortune seems to favour your intent.
      Not far from hence there stands a hilly town,
      Of ancient building, and of high renown,
      Torn from the Tuscans by the Lydian race,
      Who gave the name of Caere to the place,
      Once Agyllina call’d. It flourish’d long,
      In pride of wealth and warlike people strong,
      Till curs’d Mezentius, in a fatal hour,
      Assum’d the crown, with arbitrary pow’r.
      What words can paint those execrable times,
      The subjects’ suff’rings, and the tyrant’s crimes!
      That blood, those murders, O ye gods, replace
      On his own head, and on his impious race!
      The living and the dead at his command
      Were coupled, face to face, and hand to hand,
      Till, chok’d with stench, in loath’d embraces tied,
      The ling’ring wretches pin’d away and died.
      Thus plung’d in ills, and meditating more—
      The people’s patience, tir’d, no longer bore
      The raging monster; but with arms beset
      His house, and vengeance and destruction threat.
      They fire his palace: while the flame ascends,
      They force his guards, and execute his friends.
      He cleaves the crowd, and, favour’d by the night,
      To Turnus’ friendly court directs his flight.
      By just revenge the Tuscans set on fire,
      With arms, their king to punishment require:
      Their num’rous troops, now muster’d on the strand,
      My counsel shall submit to your command.
      Their navy swarms upon the coasts; they cry
      To hoist their anchors, but the gods deny.
      An ancient augur, skill’d in future fate,
      With these foreboding words restrains their hate:
      ‘Ye brave in arms, ye Lydian blood, the flow’r
      Of Tuscan youth, and choice of all their pow’r,
      Whom just revenge against Mezentius arms,
      To seek your tyrant’s death by lawful arms;
      Know this: no native of our land may lead
      This pow’rful people; seek a foreign head.’
      Aw’d with these words, in camps they still abide,
      And wait with longing looks their promis’d guide.
      Tarchon, the Tuscan chief, to me has sent
      Their crown, and ev’ry regal ornament:
      The people join their own with his desire;
      And all my conduct, as their king, require.
      But the chill blood that creeps within my veins,
      And age, and listless limbs unfit for pains,
      And a soul conscious of its own decay,
      Have forc’d me to refuse imperial sway.
      My Pallas were more fit to mount the throne,
      And should, but he’s a Sabine mother’s son,
      And half a native; but, in you, combine
      A manly vigour, and a foreign line.
      Where Fate and smiling Fortune shew the way,
      Pursue the ready path to sov’reign sway.
      The staff of my declining days, my son,
      Shall make your good or ill success his own;
      In fighting fields from you shall learn to dare,
      And serve the hard apprenticeship of war;
      Your matchless courage and your conduct view,
      And early shall begin t’ admire and copy you.
      Besides, two hundred horse he shall command;
      Tho’ few, a warlike and well-chosen band.
      These in my name are listed; and my son
      As many more has added in his own.”

      Scarce had he said; Achates and his guest,
      With downcast eyes, their silent grief express’d;
      Who, short of succours, and in deep despair,
      Shook at the dismal prospect of the war.
      But his bright mother, from a breaking cloud,
      To cheer her issue, thunder’d thrice aloud;
      Thrice forky lightning flash’d along the sky,
      And Tyrrhene trumpets thrice were heard on high.
      Then, gazing up, repeated peals they hear;
      And, in a heav’n serene, refulgent arms appear:
      Redd’ning the skies, and glitt’ring all around,
      The temper’d metals clash, and yield a silver sound.
      The rest stood trembling, struck with awe divine;
      Aeneas only, conscious to the sign,
      Presag’d th’ event, and joyful view’d, above,
      Th’ accomplish’d promise of the Queen of Love.
      Then, to th’ Arcadian king: “This prodigy
      (Dismiss your fear) belongs alone to me.
      Heav’n calls me to the war: th’ expected sign
      Is giv’n of promis’d aid, and arms divine.
      My goddess mother, whose indulgent care
      Foresaw the dangers of the growing war,
      This omen gave, when bright Vulcanian arms,
      Fated from force of steel by Stygian charms,
      Suspended, shone on high: she then foreshow’d
      Approaching fights, and fields to float in blood.
      Turnus shall dearly pay for faith forsworn;
      And corps, and swords, and shields, on Tiber borne,
      Shall choke his flood: now sound the loud alarms;
      And, Latian troops, prepare your perjur’d arms.”

      He said, and, rising from his homely throne,
      The solemn rites of Hercules begun,
      And on his altars wak’d the sleeping fires;
      Then cheerful to his household gods retires;
      There offers chosen sheep. Th’ Arcadian king
      And Trojan youth the same oblations bring.
      Next, of his men and ships he makes review;
      Draws out the best and ablest of the crew.
      Down with the falling stream the refuse run,
      To raise with joyful news his drooping son.
      Steeds are prepar’d to mount the Trojan band,
      Who wait their leader to the Tyrrhene land.
      A sprightly courser, fairer than the rest,
      The king himself presents his royal guest:
      A lion’s hide his back and limbs infold,
      Precious with studded work, and paws of gold.
      Fame thro’ the little city spreads aloud
      Th’ intended march, amid the fearful crowd:
      The matrons beat their breasts, dissolve in tears,
      And double their devotion in their fears.
      The war at hand appears with more affright,
      And rises ev’ry moment to the sight.

      Then old Evander, with a close embrace,
      Strain’d his departing friend; and tears o’erflow his face.
      “Would Heav’n,” said he, “my strength and youth recall,
      Such as I was beneath Praeneste’s wall;
      Then when I made the foremost foes retire,
      And set whole heaps of conquer’d shields on fire;
      When Herilus in single fight I slew,
      Whom with three lives Feronia did endue;
      And thrice I sent him to the Stygian shore,
      Till the last ebbing soul return’d no more—
      Such if I stood renew’d, not these alarms,
      Nor death, should rend me from my Pallas’ arms;
      Nor proud Mezentius, thus unpunish’d, boast
      His rapes and murders on the Tuscan coast.
      Ye gods, and mighty Jove, in pity bring
      Relief, and hear a father and a king!
      If fate and you reserve these eyes, to see
      My son return with peace and victory;
      If the lov’d boy shall bless his father’s sight;
      If we shall meet again with more delight;
      Then draw my life in length; let me sustain,
      In hopes of his embrace, the worst of pain.
      But if your hard decrees—which, O! I dread—
      Have doom’d to death his undeserving head;
      This, O this very moment, let me die!
      While hopes and fears in equal balance lie;
      While, yet possess’d of all his youthful charms,
      I strain him close within these aged arms;
      Before that fatal news my soul shall wound!”
      He said, and, swooning, sunk upon the ground.
      His servants bore him off, and softly laid
      His languish’d limbs upon his homely bed.

      The horsemen march; the gates are open’d wide;
      Aeneas at their head, Achates by his side.
      Next these, the Trojan leaders rode along;
      Last follows in the rear th’ Arcadian throng.
      Young Pallas shone conspicuous o’er the rest;
      Gilded his arms, embroider’d was his vest.
      So, from the seas, exerts his radiant head
      The star by whom the lights of heav’n are led;
      Shakes from his rosy locks the pearly dews,
      Dispels the darkness, and the day renews.
      The trembling wives the walls and turrets crowd,
      And follow, with their eyes, the dusty cloud,
      Which winds disperse by fits, and shew from far
      The blaze of arms, and shields, and shining war.
      The troops, drawn up in beautiful array,
      O’er heathy plains pursue the ready way.
      Repeated peals of shouts are heard around;
      The neighing coursers answer to the sound,
      And shake with horny hoofs the solid ground.

      A greenwood shade, for long religion known,
      Stands by the streams that wash the Tuscan town,
      Incompass’d round with gloomy hills above,
      Which add a holy horror to the grove.
      The first inhabitants of Grecian blood,
      That sacred forest to Silvanus vow’d,
      The guardian of their flocks and fields; and pay
      Their due devotions on his annual day.
      Not far from hence, along the river’s side,
      In tents secure, the Tuscan troops abide,
      By Tarchon led. Now, from a rising ground,
      Aeneas cast his wond’ring eyes around,
      And all the Tyrrhene army had in sight,
      Stretch’d on the spacious plain from left to right.
      Thither his warlike train the Trojan led,
      Refresh’d his men, and wearied horses fed.

      Meantime the mother goddess, crown’d with charms,
      Breaks thro’ the clouds, and brings the fated arms.
      Within a winding vale she finds her son,
      On the cool river’s banks, retir’d alone.
      She shews her heav’nly form without disguise,
      And gives herself to his desiring eyes.
      “Behold,” she said, “perform’d in ev’ry part,
      My promise made, and Vulcan’s labour’d art.
      Now seek, secure, the Latian enemy,
      And haughty Turnus to the field defy.”
      She said; and, having first her son embrac’d,
      The radiant arms beneath an oak she plac’d,
      Proud of the gift, he roll’d his greedy sight
      Around the work, and gaz’d with vast delight.
      He lifts, he turns, he poises, and admires
      The crested helm, that vomits radiant fires:
      His hands the fatal sword and corslet hold,
      One keen with temper’d steel, one stiff with gold:
      Both ample, flaming both, and beamy bright;
      So shines a cloud, when edg’d with adverse light.
      He shakes the pointed spear, and longs to try
      The plated cuishes on his manly thigh;
      But most admires the shield’s mysterious mould,
      And Roman triumphs rising on the gold:
      For these, emboss’d, the heav’nly smith had wrought
      (Not in the rolls of future fate untaught)
      The wars in order, and the race divine
      Of warriors issuing from the Julian line.
      The cave of Mars was dress’d with mossy greens:
      There, by the wolf, were laid the martial twins.
      Intrepid on her swelling dugs they hung;
      The foster dam loll’d out her fawning tongue:
      They suck’d secure, while, bending back her head,
      She lick’d their tender limbs, and form’d them as they fed.
      Not far from thence new Rome appears, with games
      Projected for the rape of Sabine dames.
      The pit resounds with shrieks; a war succeeds,
      For breach of public faith, and unexampled deeds.
      Here for revenge the Sabine troops contend;
      The Romans there with arms the prey defend.
      Wearied with tedious war, at length they cease;
      And both the kings and kingdoms plight the peace.
      The friendly chiefs before Jove’s altar stand,
      Both arm’d, with each a charger in his hand:
      A fatted sow for sacrifice is led,
      With imprecations on the perjur’d head.
      Near this, the traitor Metius, stretch’d between
      Four fiery steeds, is dragg’d along the green,
      By Tullus’ doom: the brambles drink his blood,
      And his torn limbs are left the vulture’s food.
      There, Porsena to Rome proud Tarquin brings,
      And would by force restore the banish’d kings.
      One tyrant for his fellow-tyrant fights;
      The Roman youth assert their native rights.
      Before the town the Tuscan army lies,
      To win by famine, or by fraud surprise.
      Their king, half-threat’ning, half-disdaining stood,
      While Cocles broke the bridge, and stemm’d the flood.
      The captive maids there tempt the raging tide,
      Scap’d from their chains, with Cloelia for their guide.
      High on a rock heroic Manlius stood,
      To guard the temple, and the temple’s god.
      Then Rome was poor; and there you might behold
      The palace thatch’d with straw, now roof’d with gold.
      The silver goose before the shining gate
      There flew, and, by her cackle, sav’d the state.
      She told the Gauls’ approach; th’ approaching Gauls,
      Obscure in night, ascend, and seize the walls.
      The gold dissembled well their yellow hair,
      And golden chains on their white necks they wear.
      Gold are their vests; long Alpine spears they wield,
      And their left arm sustains a length of shield.
      Hard by, the leaping Salian priests advance;
      And naked thro’ the streets the mad Luperci dance,
      In caps of wool; the targets dropp’d from heav’n.
      Here modest matrons, in soft litters driv’n,
      To pay their vows in solemn pomp appear,
      And odorous gums in their chaste hands they bear.
      Far hence remov’d, the Stygian seats are seen;
      Pains of the damn’d, and punish’d Catiline
      Hung on a rock—the traitor; and, around,
      The Furies hissing from the nether ground.
      Apart from these, the happy souls he draws,
      And Cato’s holy ghost dispensing laws.

      Betwixt the quarters flows a golden sea;
      But foaming surges there in silver play.
      The dancing dolphins with their tails divide
      The glitt’ring waves, and cut the precious tide.
      Amid the main, two mighty fleets engage
      Their brazen beaks, oppos’d with equal rage.
      Actium surveys the well-disputed prize;
      Leucate’s wat’ry plain with foamy billows fries.
      Young Caesar, on the stern, in armour bright,
      Here leads the Romans and their gods to fight:
      His beamy temples shoot their flames afar,
      And o’er his head is hung the Julian star.
      Agrippa seconds him, with prosp’rous gales,
      And, with propitious gods, his foes assails:
      A naval crown, that binds his manly brows,
      The happy fortune of the fight foreshows.
      Rang’d on the line oppos’d, Antonius brings
      Barbarian aids, and troops of Eastern kings;
      Th’ Arabians near, and Bactrians from afar,
      Of tongues discordant, and a mingled war:
      And, rich in gaudy robes, amidst the strife,
      His ill fate follows him—th’ Egyptian wife.
      Moving they fight; with oars and forky prows
      The froth is gather’d, and the water glows.
      It seems, as if the Cyclades again
      Were rooted up, and justled in the main;
      Or floating mountains floating mountains meet;
      Such is the fierce encounter of the fleet.
      Fireballs are thrown, and pointed jav’lins fly;
      The fields of Neptune take a purple dye.
      The queen herself, amidst the loud alarms,
      With cymbals toss’d her fainting soldiers warms—
      Fool as she was! who had not yet divin’d
      Her cruel fate, nor saw the snakes behind.
      Her country gods, the monsters of the sky,
      Great Neptune, Pallas, and Love’s Queen defy:
      The dog Anubis barks, but barks in vain,
      Nor longer dares oppose th’ ethereal train.
      Mars in the middle of the shining shield
      Is grav’d, and strides along the liquid field.
      The Dirae souse from heav’n with swift descent;
      And Discord, dyed in blood, with garments rent,
      Divides the prease: her steps Bellona treads,
      And shakes her iron rod above their heads.
      This seen, Apollo, from his Actian height,
      Pours down his arrows; at whose winged flight
      The trembling Indians and Egyptians yield,
      And soft Sabaeans quit the wat’ry field.
      The fatal mistress hoists her silken sails,
      And, shrinking from the fight, invokes the gales.
      Aghast she looks, and heaves her breast for breath,
      Panting, and pale with fear of future death.
      The god had figur’d her as driv’n along
      By winds and waves, and scudding thro’ the throng.
      Just opposite, sad Nilus opens wide
      His arms and ample bosom to the tide,
      And spreads his mantle o’er the winding coast,
      In which he wraps his queen, and hides the flying host.
      The victor to the gods his thanks express’d,
      And Rome, triumphant, with his presence bless’d.
      Three hundred temples in the town he plac’d;
      With spoils and altars ev’ry temple grac’d.
      Three shining nights, and three succeeding days,
      The fields resound with shouts, the streets with praise,
      The domes with songs, the theatres with plays.
      All altars flame: before each altar lies,
      Drench’d in his gore, the destin’d sacrifice.
      Great Caesar sits sublime upon his throne,
      Before Apollo’s porch of Parian stone;
      Accepts the presents vow’d for victory,
      And hangs the monumental crowns on high.
      Vast crowds of vanquish’d nations march along,
      Various in arms, in habit, and in tongue.
      Here, Mulciber assigns the proper place
      For Carians, and th’ ungirt Numidian race;
      Then ranks the Thracians in the second row,
      With Scythians, expert in the dart and bow.
      And here the tam’d Euphrates humbly glides,
      And there the Rhine submits her swelling tides,
      And proud Araxes, whom no bridge could bind;
      The Danes’ unconquer’d offspring march behind,
      And Morini, the last of humankind.

      These figures, on the shield divinely wrought,
      By Vulcan labour’d, and by Venus brought,
      With joy and wonder fill the hero’s thought.
      Unknown the names, he yet admires the grace,
      And bears aloft the fame and fortune of his race.






      While these affairs in distant places pass’d,
      The various Iris Juno sends with haste,
      To find bold Turnus, who, with anxious thought,
      The secret shade of his great grandsire sought.
      Retir’d alone she found the daring man,
      And op’d her rosy lips, and thus began:
      “What none of all the gods could grant thy vows,
      That, Turnus, this auspicious day bestows.
      Aeneas, gone to seek th’ Arcadian prince,
      Has left the Trojan camp without defence;
      And, short of succours there, employs his pains
      In parts remote to raise the Tuscan swains.
      Now snatch an hour that favours thy designs;
      Unite thy forces, and attack their lines.”
      This said, on equal wings she pois’d her weight,
      And form’d a radiant rainbow in her flight.

      The Daunian hero lifts his hands and eyes,
      And thus invokes the goddess as she flies:
      “Iris, the grace of heav’n, what pow’r divine
      Has sent thee down, thro’ dusky clouds to shine?
      See, they divide; immortal day appears,
      And glitt’ring planets dancing in their spheres!
      With joy, these happy omens I obey,
      And follow to the war the god that leads the way.”
      Thus having said, as by the brook he stood,
      He scoop’d the water from the crystal flood;
      Then with his hands the drops to heav’n he throws,
      And loads the pow’rs above with offer’d vows.

      Now march the bold confed’rates thro’ the plain,
      Well hors’d, well clad; a rich and shining train.
      Messapus leads the van; and, in the rear,
      The sons of Tyrrheus in bright arms appear.
      In the main battle, with his flaming crest,
      The mighty Turnus tow’rs above the rest.
      Silent they move, majestically slow,
      Like ebbing Nile, or Ganges in his flow.
      The Trojans view the dusty cloud from far,
      And the dark menace of the distant war.
      Caicus from the rampire saw it rise,
      Black’ning the fields, and thick’ning thro’ the skies.
      Then to his fellows thus aloud he calls:
      “What rolling clouds, my friends, approach the walls?
      Arm! arm! and man the works! prepare your spears
      And pointed darts! the Latian host appears.”

      Thus warn’d, they shut their gates; with shouts ascend
      The bulwarks, and, secure, their foes attend:
      For their wise gen’ral, with foreseeing care,
      Had charg’d them not to tempt the doubtful war,
      Nor, tho’ provok’d, in open fields advance,
      But close within their lines attend their chance.
      Unwilling, yet they keep the strict command,
      And sourly wait in arms the hostile band.
      The fiery Turnus flew before the rest:
      A piebald steed of Thracian strain he press’d;
      His helm of massy gold, and crimson was his crest.
      With twenty horse to second his designs,
      An unexpected foe, he fac’d the lines.
      “Is there,” he said, “in arms, who bravely dare
      His leader’s honour and his danger share?”
      Then spurring on, his brandish’d dart he threw,
      In sign of war: applauding shouts ensue.

      Amaz’d to find a dastard race, that run
      Behind the rampires and the battle shun,
      He rides around the camp, with rolling eyes,
      And stops at ev’ry post, and ev’ry passage tries.
      So roams the nightly wolf about the fold:
      Wet with descending show’rs, and stiff with cold,
      He howls for hunger, and he grins for pain,
      (His gnashing teeth are exercis’d in vain,)
      And, impotent of anger, finds no way
      In his distended paws to grasp the prey.
      The mothers listen; but the bleating lambs
      Securely swig the dug, beneath the dams.
      Thus ranges eager Turnus o’er the plain.
      Sharp with desire, and furious with disdain;
      Surveys each passage with a piercing sight,
      To force his foes in equal field to fight.
      Thus while he gazes round, at length he spies,
      Where, fenc’d with strong redoubts, their navy lies,
      Close underneath the walls; the washing tide
      Secures from all approach this weaker side.
      He takes the wish’d occasion, fills his hand
      With ready fires, and shakes a flaming brand.
      Urg’d by his presence, ev’ry soul is warm’d,
      And ev’ry hand with kindled fires is arm’d.
      From the fir’d pines the scatt’ring sparkles fly;
      Fat vapours, mix’d with flames, involve the sky.
      What pow’r, O Muses, could avert the flame
      Which threaten’d, in the fleet, the Trojan name?
      Tell: for the fact, thro’ length of time obscure,
      Is hard to faith; yet shall the fame endure.

      ’Tis said that, when the chief prepar’d his flight,
      And fell’d his timber from Mount Ida’s height,
      The grandam goddess then approach’d her son,
      And with a mother’s majesty begun:
      “Grant me,” she said, “the sole request I bring,
      Since conquer’d heav’n has own’d you for its king.
      On Ida’s brows, for ages past, there stood,
      With firs and maples fill’d, a shady wood;
      And on the summit rose a sacred grove,
      Where I was worship’d with religious love.
      Those woods, that holy grove, my long delight,
      I gave the Trojan prince, to speed his flight.
      Now, fill’d with fear, on their behalf I come;
      Let neither winds o’erset, nor waves intomb
      The floating forests of the sacred pine;
      But let it be their safety to be mine.”
      Then thus replied her awful son, who rolls
      The radiant stars, and heav’n and earth controls:
      “How dare you, mother, endless date demand
      For vessels moulded by a mortal hand?
      What then is fate? Shall bold Aeneas ride,
      Of safety certain, on th’ uncertain tide?
      Yet, what I can, I grant; when, wafted o’er,
      The chief is landed on the Latian shore,
      Whatever ships escape the raging storms,
      At my command shall change their fading forms
      To nymphs divine, and plow the wat’ry way,
      Like Dotis and the daughters of the sea.”
      To seal his sacred vow, by Styx he swore,
      The lake of liquid pitch, the dreary shore,
      And Phlegethon’s innavigable flood,
      And the black regions of his brother god.
      He said; and shook the skies with his imperial nod.

      And now at length the number’d hours were come,
      Prefix’d by fate’s irrevocable doom,
      When the great Mother of the Gods was free
      To save her ships, and finish Jove’s decree.
      First, from the quarter of the morn, there sprung
      A light that sign’d the heav’ns, and shot along;
      Then from a cloud, fring’d round with golden fires,
      Were timbrels heard, and Berecynthian choirs;
      And, last, a voice, with more than mortal sounds,
      Both hosts, in arms oppos’d, with equal horror wounds:
      “O Trojan race, your needless aid forbear,
      And know, my ships are my peculiar care.
      With greater ease the bold Rutulian may,
      With hissing brands, attempt to burn the sea,
      Than singe my sacred pines. But you, my charge,
      Loos’d from your crooked anchors, launch at large,
      Exalted each a nymph: forsake the sand,
      And swim the seas, at Cybele’s command.”
      No sooner had the goddess ceas’d to speak,
      When, lo! th’ obedient ships their haulsers break;
      And, strange to tell, like dolphins, in the main
      They plunge their prows, and dive, and spring again:
      As many beauteous maids the billows sweep,
      As rode before tall vessels on the deep.

      The foes, surpris’d with wonder, stood aghast;
      Messapus curb’d his fiery courser’s haste;
      Old Tiber roar’d, and, raising up his head,
      Call’d back his waters to their oozy bed.
      Turnus alone, undaunted, bore the shock,
      And with these words his trembling troops bespoke:
      “These monsters for the Trojans’ fate are meant,
      And are by Jove for black presages sent.
      He takes the cowards’ last relief away;
      For fly they cannot, and, constrain’d to stay,
      Must yield unfought, a base inglorious prey.
      The liquid half of all the globe is lost;
      Heav’n shuts the seas, and we secure the coast.
      Theirs is no more than that small spot of ground
      Which myriads of our martial men surround.
      Their fates I fear not, or vain oracles.
      ’Twas giv’n to Venus they should cross the seas,
      And land secure upon the Latian plains:
      Their promis’d hour is pass’d, and mine remains.
      ’Tis in the fate of Turnus to destroy,
      With sword and fire, the faithless race of Troy.
      Shall such affronts as these alone inflame
      The Grecian brothers, and the Grecian name?
      My cause and theirs is one; a fatal strife,
      And final ruin, for a ravish’d wife.
      Was ’t not enough, that, punish’d for the crime,
      They fell; but will they fall a second time?
      One would have thought they paid enough before,
      To curse the costly sex, and durst offend no more.
      Can they securely trust their feeble wall,
      A slight partition, a thin interval,
      Betwixt their fate and them; when Troy, tho’ built
      By hands divine, yet perish’d by their guilt?
      Lend me, for once, my friends, your valiant hands,
      To force from out their lines these dastard bands.
      Less than a thousand ships will end this war,
      Nor Vulcan needs his fated arms prepare.
      Let all the Tuscans, all th’ Arcadians, join!
      Nor these, nor those, shall frustrate my design.
      Let them not fear the treasons of the night,
      The robb’d Palladium, the pretended flight:
      Our onset shall be made in open light.
      No wooden engine shall their town betray;
      Fires they shall have around, but fires by day.
      No Grecian babes before their camp appear,
      Whom Hector’s arms detain’d to the tenth tardy year.
      Now, since the sun is rolling to the west,
      Give we the silent night to needful rest:
      Refresh your bodies, and your arms prepare;
      The morn shall end the small remains of war.”

      The post of honour to Messapus falls,
      To keep the nightly guard, to watch the walls,
      To pitch the fires at distances around,
      And close the Trojans in their scanty ground.
      Twice seven Rutulian captains ready stand,
      And twice seven hundred horse these chiefs command;
      All clad in shining arms the works invest,
      Each with a radiant helm and waving crest.
      Stretch’d at their length, they press the grassy ground;
      They laugh, they sing, (the jolly bowls go round,)
      With lights and cheerful fires renew the day,
      And pass the wakeful night in feasts and play.

      The Trojans, from above, their foes beheld,
      And with arm’d legions all the rampires fill’d.
      Seiz’d with affright, their gates they first explore;
      Join works to works with bridges, tow’r to tow’r:
      Thus all things needful for defence abound.
      Mnestheus and brave Seresthus walk the round,
      Commission’d by their absent prince to share
      The common danger, and divide the care.
      The soldiers draw their lots, and, as they fall,
      By turns relieve each other on the wall.

      Nigh where the foes their utmost guards advance,
      To watch the gate was warlike Nisus’ chance.
      His father Hyrtacus of noble blood;
      His mother was a huntress of the wood,
      And sent him to the wars. Well could he bear
      His lance in fight, and dart the flying spear,
      But better skill’d unerring shafts to send.
      Beside him stood Euryalus, his friend:
      Euryalus, than whom the Trojan host
      No fairer face, or sweeter air, could boast.
      Scarce had the down to shade his cheeks begun.
      One was their care, and their delight was one:
      One common hazard in the war they shar’d,
      And now were both by choice upon the guard.

      Then Nisus thus: “Or do the gods inspire
      This warmth, or make we gods of our desire?
      A gen’rous ardour boils within my breast,
      Eager of action, enemy to rest:
      This urges me to fight, and fires my mind
      To leave a memorable name behind.
      Thou see’st the foe secure; how faintly shine
      Their scatter’d fires! the most, in sleep supine
      Along the ground, an easy conquest lie:
      The wakeful few the fuming flagon ply;
      All hush’d around. Now hear what I revolve—
      A thought unripe—and scarcely yet resolve.
      Our absent prince both camp and council mourn;
      By message both would hasten his return:
      If they confer what I demand on thee,
      (For fame is recompense enough for me,)
      Methinks, beneath yon hill, I have espied
      A way that safely will my passage guide.”

      Euryalus stood list’ning while he spoke,
      With love of praise and noble envy struck;
      Then to his ardent friend expos’d his mind:
      “All this, alone, and leaving me behind!
      Am I unworthy, Nisus, to be join’d?
      Think’st thou I can my share of glory yield,
      Or send thee unassisted to the field?
      Not so my father taught my childhood arms;
      Born in a siege, and bred among alarms!
      Nor is my youth unworthy of my friend,
      Nor of the heav’n-born hero I attend.
      The thing call’d life, with ease I can disclaim,
      And think it over-sold to purchase fame.”

      Then Nisus thus: “Alas! thy tender years
      Would minister new matter to my fears.
      So may the gods, who view this friendly strife,
      Restore me to thy lov’d embrace with life,
      Condemn’d to pay my vows, (as sure I trust,)
      This thy request is cruel and unjust.
      But if some chance—as many chances are,
      And doubtful hazards, in the deeds of war—
      If one should reach my head, there let it fall,
      And spare thy life; I would not perish all.
      Thy bloomy youth deserves a longer date:
      Live thou to mourn thy love’s unhappy fate;
      To bear my mangled body from the foe,
      Or buy it back, and fun’ral rites bestow.
      Or, if hard fortune shall those dues deny,
      Thou canst at least an empty tomb supply.
      O let not me the widow’s tears renew!
      Nor let a mother’s curse my name pursue:
      Thy pious parent, who, for love of thee,
      Forsook the coasts of friendly Sicily,
      Her age committing to the seas and wind,
      When ev’ry weary matron stay’d behind.”
      To this, Euryalus: “You plead in vain,
      And but protract the cause you cannot gain.
      No more delays, but haste!” With that, he wakes
      The nodding watch; each to his office takes.
      The guard reliev’d, the gen’rous couple went
      To find the council at the royal tent.

      All creatures else forgot their daily care,
      And sleep, the common gift of nature, share;
      Except the Trojan peers, who wakeful sate
      In nightly council for th’ indanger’d state.
      They vote a message to their absent chief,
      Shew their distress, and beg a swift relief.
      Amid the camp a silent seat they chose,
      Remote from clamour, and secure from foes.
      On their left arms their ample shields they bear,
      The right reclin’d upon the bending spear.
      Now Nisus and his friend approach the guard,
      And beg admission, eager to be heard:
      Th’ affair important, not to be deferr’d.
      Ascanius bids ’em be conducted in,
      Ord’ring the more experienc’d to begin.
      Then Nisus thus: “Ye fathers, lend your ears;
      Nor judge our bold attempt beyond our years.
      The foe, securely drench’d in sleep and wine,
      Neglect their watch; the fires but thinly shine;
      And where the smoke in cloudy vapours flies,
      Cov’ring the plain, and curling to the skies,
      Betwixt two paths, which at the gate divide,
      Close by the sea, a passage we have spied,
      Which will our way to great Aeneas guide.
      Expect each hour to see him safe again,
      Loaded with spoils of foes in battle slain.
      Snatch we the lucky minute while we may;
      Nor can we be mistaken in the way;
      For, hunting in the vale, we both have seen
      The rising turrets, and the stream between,
      And know the winding course, with ev’ry ford.”

      He ceas’d; and old Alethes took the word:
      “Our country gods, in whom our trust we place,
      Will yet from ruin save the Trojan race,
      While we behold such dauntless worth appear
      In dawning youth, and souls so void of fear.”
      Then into tears of joy the father broke;
      Each in his longing arms by turns he took;
      Panted and paus’d; and thus again he spoke:
      “Ye brave young men, what equal gifts can we,
      In recompense of such desert, decree?
      The greatest, sure, and best you can receive,
      The gods and your own conscious worth will give.
      The rest our grateful gen’ral will bestow,
      And young Ascanius till his manhood owe.”

      “And I, whose welfare in my father lies,”
      Ascanius adds, “by the great deities,
      By my dear country, by my household gods,
      By hoary Vesta’s rites and dark abodes,
      Adjure you both, (on you my fortune stands;
      That and my faith I plight into your hands,)
      Make me but happy in his safe return,
      Whose wanted presence I can only mourn;
      Your common gift shall two large goblets be
      Of silver, wrought with curious imagery,
      And high emboss’d, which, when old Priam reign’d,
      My conqu’ring sire at sack’d Arisba gain’d;
      And more, two tripods cast in antique mould,
      With two great talents of the finest gold;
      Beside a costly bowl, ingrav’d with art,
      Which Dido gave, when first she gave her heart.
      But, if in conquer’d Italy we reign,
      When spoils by lot the victor shall obtain—
      Thou saw’st the courser by proud Turnus press’d:
      That, Nisus, and his arms, and nodding crest,
      And shield, from chance exempt, shall be thy share:
      Twelve lab’ring slaves, twelve handmaids young and fair
      All clad in rich attire, and train’d with care;
      And, last, a Latian field with fruitful plains,
      And a large portion of the king’s domains.
      But thou, whose years are more to mine allied,
      No fate my vow’d affection shall divide
      From thee, heroic youth! Be wholly mine;
      Take full possession; all my soul is thine.
      One faith, one fame, one fate, shall both attend;
      My life’s companion, and my bosom friend:
      My peace shall be committed to thy care,
      And to thy conduct my concerns in war.”

      Then thus the young Euryalus replied:
      “Whatever fortune, good or bad, betide,
      The same shall be my age, as now my youth;
      No time shall find me wanting to my truth.
      This only from your goodness let me gain
      (And, this ungranted, all rewards are vain)
      Of Priam’s royal race my mother came—
      And sure the best that ever bore the name—
      Whom neither Troy nor Sicily could hold
      From me departing, but, o’erspent and old,
      My fate she follow’d. Ignorant of this
      (Whatever) danger, neither parting kiss,
      Nor pious blessing taken, her I leave,
      And in this only act of all my life deceive.
      By this right hand and conscious night I swear,
      My soul so sad a farewell could not bear.
      Be you her comfort; fill my vacant place
      (Permit me to presume so great a grace)
      Support her age, forsaken and distress’d.
      That hope alone will fortify my breast
      Against the worst of fortunes, and of fears.”
      He said. The mov’d assistants melt in tears.

      Then thus Ascanius, wonderstruck to see
      That image of his filial piety:
      “So great beginnings, in so green an age,
      Exact the faith which I again engage.
      Thy mother all the dues shall justly claim,
      Creusa had, and only want the name.
      Whate’er event thy bold attempt shall have,
      ’Tis merit to have borne a son so brave.
      Now by my head, a sacred oath, I swear,
      (My father us’d it,) what, returning here
      Crown’d with success, I for thyself prepare,
      That, if thou fail, shall thy lov’d mother share.”

      He said, and weeping, while he spoke the word,
      From his broad belt he drew a shining sword,
      Magnificent with gold. Lycaon made,
      And in an ivory scabbard sheath’d the blade.
      This was his gift. Great Mnestheus gave his friend
      A lion’s hide, his body to defend;
      And good Alethes furnish’d him, beside,
      With his own trusty helm, of temper tried.

      Thus arm’d they went. The noble Trojans wait
      Their issuing forth, and follow to the gate
      With prayers and vows. Above the rest appears
      Ascanius, manly far beyond his years,
      And messages committed to their care,
      Which all in winds were lost, and flitting air.

      The trenches first they pass’d; then took their way
      Where their proud foes in pitch’d pavilions lay;
      To many fatal, ere themselves were slain.
      They found the careless host dispers’d upon the plain,
      Who, gorg’d, and drunk with wine, supinely snore.
      Unharness’d chariots stand along the shore:
      Amidst the wheels and reins, the goblet by,
      A medley of debauch and war, they lie.
      Observing Nisus shew’d his friend the sight:
      “Behold a conquest gain’d without a fight.
      Occasion offers, and I stand prepar’d;
      There lies our way; be thou upon the guard,
      And look around, while I securely go,
      And hew a passage thro’ the sleeping foe.”
      Softly he spoke; then striding took his way,
      With his drawn sword, where haughty Rhamnes lay;
      His head rais’d high on tapestry beneath,
      And heaving from his breast, he drew his breath;
      A king and prophet, by King Turnus lov’d:
      But fate by prescience cannot be remov’d.
      Him and his sleeping slaves he slew; then spies
      Where Remus, with his rich retinue, lies.
      His armour-bearer first, and next he kills
      His charioteer, intrench’d betwixt the wheels
      And his lov’d horses; last invades their lord;
      Full on his neck he drives the fatal sword:
      The gasping head flies off; a purple flood
      Flows from the trunk, that welters in the blood,
      Which, by the spurning heels dispers’d around,
      The bed besprinkles and bedews the ground.
      Lamus the bold, and Lamyrus the strong,
      He slew, and then Serranus fair and young.
      From dice and wine the youth retir’d to rest,
      And puff’d the fumy god from out his breast:
      Ev’n then he dreamt of drink and lucky play—
      More lucky, had it lasted till the day.
      The famish’d lion thus, with hunger bold,
      O’erleaps the fences of the nightly fold,
      And tears the peaceful flocks: with silent awe
      Trembling they lie, and pant beneath his paw.

      Nor with less rage Euryalus employs
      The wrathful sword, or fewer foes destroys;
      But on th’ ignoble crowd his fury flew;
      He Fadus, Hebesus, and Rhoetus slew.
      Oppress’d with heavy sleep the former fell,
      But Rhoetus wakeful, and observing all:
      Behind a spacious jar he slink’d for fear;
      The fatal iron found and reach’d him there;
      For, as he rose, it pierc’d his naked side,
      And, reeking, thence return’d in crimson dyed.
      The wound pours out a stream of wine and blood;
      The purple soul comes floating in the flood.

      Now, where Messapus quarter’d, they arrive.
      The fires were fainting there, and just alive;
      The warrior-horses, tied in order, fed.
      Nisus observ’d the discipline, and said:
      “Our eager thirst of blood may both betray;
      And see the scatter’d streaks of dawning day,
      Foe to nocturnal thefts. No more, my friend;
      Here let our glutted execution end.
      A lane thro’ slaughter’d bodies we have made.”
      The bold Euryalus, tho’ loth, obey’d.
      Of arms, and arras, and of plate, they find
      A precious load; but these they leave behind.
      Yet, fond of gaudy spoils, the boy would stay
      To make the rich caparison his prey,
      Which on the steed of conquer’d Rhamnes lay.
      Nor did his eyes less longingly behold
      The girdle-belt, with nails of burnish’d gold.
      This present Caedicus the rich bestow’d
      On Remulus, when friendship first they vow’d,
      And, absent, join’d in hospitable ties:
      He, dying, to his heir bequeath’d the prize;
      Till, by the conqu’ring Ardean troops oppress’d,
      He fell; and they the glorious gift possess’d.
      These glitt’ring spoils (now made the victor’s gain)
      He to his body suits, but suits in vain:
      Messapus’ helm he finds among the rest,
      And laces on, and wears the waving crest.
      Proud of their conquest, prouder of their prey,
      They leave the camp, and take the ready way.

      But far they had not pass’d, before they spied
      Three hundred horse, with Volscens for their guide.
      The queen a legion to King Turnus sent;
      But the swift horse the slower foot prevent,
      And now, advancing, sought the leader’s tent.
      They saw the pair; for, thro’ the doubtful shade,
      His shining helm Euryalus betray’d,
      On which the moon with full reflection play’d.
      “’Tis not for naught,” cried Volscens from the crowd,
      “These men go there;” then rais’d his voice aloud:
      “Stand! stand! why thus in arms? And whither bent?
      From whence, to whom, and on what errand sent?”
      Silent they scud away, and haste their flight
      To neighb’ring woods, and trust themselves to night.
      The speedy horse all passages belay,
      And spur their smoking steeds to cross their way,
      And watch each entrance of the winding wood.
      Black was the forest: thick with beech it stood,
      Horrid with fern, and intricate with thorn;
      Few paths of human feet, or tracks of beasts, were worn.
      The darkness of the shades, his heavy prey,
      And fear, misled the younger from his way.
      But Nisus hit the turns with happier haste,
      And, thoughtless of his friend, the forest pass’d,
      And Alban plains, from Alba’s name so call’d,
      Where King Latinus then his oxen stall’d;
      Till, turning at the length, he stood his ground,
      And miss’d his friend, and cast his eyes around:
      “Ah wretch!” he cried, “where have I left behind
      Th’ unhappy youth? where shall I hope to find?
      Or what way take?” Again he ventures back,
      And treads the mazes of his former track.
      He winds the wood, and, list’ning, hears the noise
      Of tramping coursers, and the riders’ voice.
      The sound approach’d; and suddenly he view’d
      The foes inclosing, and his friend pursued,
      Forelaid and taken, while he strove in vain
      The shelter of the friendly shades to gain.
      What should he next attempt? what arms employ,
      What fruitless force, to free the captive boy?
      Or desperate should he rush and lose his life,
      With odds oppress’d, in such unequal strife?

      Resolv’d at length, his pointed spear he shook;
      And, casting on the moon a mournful look:
      “Guardian of groves, and goddess of the night,
      Fair queen,” he said, “direct my dart aright.
      If e’er my pious father, for my sake,
      Did grateful off’rings on thy altars make,
      Or I increas’d them with my sylvan toils,
      And hung thy holy roofs with savage spoils,
      Give me to scatter these.” Then from his ear
      He pois’d, and aim’d, and launch’d the trembling spear.
      The deadly weapon, hissing from the grove,
      Impetuous on the back of Sulmo drove;
      Pierc’d his thin armour, drank his vital blood,
      And in his body left the broken wood.
      He staggers round; his eyeballs roll in death,
      And with short sobs he gasps away his breath.
      All stand amaz’d—a second jav’lin flies
      With equal strength, and quivers thro’ the skies.
      This thro’ thy temples, Tagus, forc’d the way,
      And in the brainpan warmly buried lay.
      Fierce Volscens foams with rage, and, gazing round,
      Descried not him who gave the fatal wound,
      Nor knew to fix revenge: “But thou,” he cries,
      “Shalt pay for both,” and at the pris’ner flies
      With his drawn sword. Then, struck with deep despair,
      That cruel sight the lover could not bear;
      But from his covert rush’d in open view,
      And sent his voice before him as he flew:
      “Me! me!” he cried—“turn all your swords alone
      On me—the fact confess’d, the fault my own.
      He neither could nor durst, the guiltless youth:
      Ye moon and stars, bear witness to the truth!
      His only crime (if friendship can offend)
      Is too much love to his unhappy friend.”
      Too late he speaks: the sword, which fury guides,
      Driv’n with full force, had pierc’d his tender sides.
      Down fell the beauteous youth: the yawning wound
      Gush’d out a purple stream, and stain’d the ground.
      His snowy neck reclines upon his breast,
      Like a fair flow’r by the keen share oppress’d;
      Like a white poppy sinking on the plain,
      Whose heavy head is overcharg’d with rain.
      Despair, and rage, and vengeance justly vow’d,
      Drove Nisus headlong on the hostile crowd.
      Volscens he seeks; on him alone he bends:
      Borne back and bor’d by his surrounding friends,
      Onward he press’d, and kept him still in sight;
      Then whirl’d aloft his sword with all his might:
      Th’ unerring steel descended while he spoke,
      Pierc’d his wide mouth, and thro’ his weazon broke.
      Dying, he slew; and, stagg’ring on the plain,
      With swimming eyes he sought his lover slain;
      Then quiet on his bleeding bosom fell,
      Content, in death, to be reveng’d so well.

      O happy friends! for, if my verse can give
      Immortal life, your fame shall ever live,
      Fix’d as the Capitol’s foundation lies,
      And spread, where’er the Roman eagle flies!

      The conqu’ring party first divide the prey,
      Then their slain leader to the camp convey.
      With wonder, as they went, the troops were fill’d,
      To see such numbers whom so few had kill’d.
      Serranus, Rhamnes, and the rest, they found:
      Vast crowds the dying and the dead surround;
      And the yet reeking blood o’erflows the ground.
      All knew the helmet which Messapus lost,
      But mourn’d a purchase that so dear had cost.
      Now rose the ruddy morn from Tithon’s bed,
      And with the dawn of day the skies o’erspread;
      Nor long the sun his daily course withheld,
      But added colours to the world reveal’d:
      When early Turnus, wak’ning with the light,
      All clad in armour, calls his troops to fight.
      His martial men with fierce harangue he fir’d,
      And his own ardour in their souls inspir’d.
      This done—to give new terror to his foes,
      The heads of Nisus and his friend he shows,
      Rais’d high on pointed spears—a ghastly sight:
      Loud peals of shouts ensue, and barbarous delight.

      Meantime the Trojans run, where danger calls;
      They line their trenches, and they man their walls.
      In front extended to the left they stood;
      Safe was the right, surrounded by the flood.
      But, casting from their tow’rs a frightful view,
      They saw the faces, which too well they knew,
      Tho’ then disguis’d in death, and smear’d all o’er
      With filth obscene, and dropping putrid gore.
      Soon hasty fame thro’ the sad city bears
      The mournful message to the mother’s ears.
      An icy cold benumbs her limbs; she shakes;
      Her cheeks the blood, her hand the web forsakes.
      She runs the rampires round amidst the war,
      Nor fears the flying darts; she rends her hair,
      And fills with loud laments the liquid air.
      “Thus, then, my lov’d Euryalus appears!
      Thus looks the prop of my declining years!
      Was’t on this face my famish’d eyes I fed?
      Ah! how unlike the living is the dead!
      And could’st thou leave me, cruel, thus alone?
      Not one kind kiss from a departing son!
      No look, no last adieu before he went,
      In an ill-boding hour to slaughter sent!
      Cold on the ground, and pressing foreign clay,
      To Latian dogs and fowls he lies a prey!
      Nor was I near to close his dying eyes,
      To wash his wounds, to weep his obsequies,
      To call about his corpse his crying friends,
      Or spread the mantle (made for other ends)
      On his dear body, which I wove with care,
      Nor did my daily pains or nightly labour spare.
      Where shall I find his corpse? what earth sustains
      His trunk dismember’d, and his cold remains?
      For this, alas! I left my needful ease,
      Expos’d my life to winds and winter seas!
      If any pity touch Rutulian hearts,
      Here empty all your quivers, all your darts;
      Or, if they fail, thou, Jove, conclude my woe,
      And send me thunderstruck to shades below!”
      Her shrieks and clamours pierce the Trojans’ ears,
      Unman their courage, and augment their fears;
      Nor young Ascanius could the sight sustain,
      Nor old Ilioneus his tears restrain,
      But Actor and Idaeus jointly sent,
      To bear the madding mother to her tent.

      And now the trumpets terribly, from far,
      With rattling clangour, rouse the sleepy war.
      The soldiers’ shouts succeed the brazen sounds;
      And heav’n, from pole to pole, the noise rebounds.
      The Volscians bear their shields upon their head,
      And, rushing forward, form a moving shed.
      These fill the ditch; those pull the bulwarks down:
      Some raise the ladders; others scale the town.
      But, where void spaces on the walls appear,
      Or thin defence, they pour their forces there.
      With poles and missive weapons, from afar,
      The Trojans keep aloof the rising war.
      Taught, by their ten years’ siege, defensive fight,
      They roll down ribs of rocks, an unresisted weight,
      To break the penthouse with the pond’rous blow,
      Which yet the patient Volscians undergo:
      But could not bear th’ unequal combat long;
      For, where the Trojans find the thickest throng,
      The ruin falls: their shatter’d shields give way,
      And their crush’d heads become an easy prey.
      They shrink for fear, abated of their rage,
      Nor longer dare in a blind fight engage;
      Contented now to gall them from below
      With darts and slings, and with the distant bow.

      Elsewhere Mezentius, terrible to view,
      A blazing pine within the trenches threw.
      But brave Messapus, Neptune’s warlike son,
      Broke down the palisades, the trenches won,
      And loud for ladders calls, to scale the town.

      Calliope, begin! Ye sacred Nine,
      Inspire your poet in his high design,
      To sing what slaughter manly Turnus made,
      What souls he sent below the Stygian shade,
      What fame the soldiers with their captain share,
      And the vast circuit of the fatal war;
      For you in singing martial facts excel;
      You best remember, and alone can tell.

      There stood a tow’r, amazing to the sight,
      Built up of beams, and of stupendous height:
      Art, and the nature of the place, conspir’d
      To furnish all the strength that war requir’d.
      To level this, the bold Italians join;
      The wary Trojans obviate their design;
      With weighty stones o’erwhelm their troops below,
      Shoot thro’ the loopholes, and sharp jav’lins throw.
      Turnus, the chief, toss’d from his thund’ring hand
      Against the wooden walls, a flaming brand:
      It stuck, the fiery plague; the winds were high;
      The planks were season’d, and the timber dry.
      Contagion caught the posts; it spread along,
      Scorch’d, and to distance drove the scatter’d throng.
      The Trojans fled; the fire pursued amain,
      Still gath’ring fast upon the trembling train;
      Till, crowding to the corners of the wall,
      Down the defence and the defenders fall.
      The mighty flaw makes heav’n itself resound:
      The dead and dying Trojans strew the ground.
      The tow’r, that follow’d on the fallen crew,
      Whelm’d o’er their heads, and buried whom it slew:
      Some stuck upon the darts themselves had sent;
      All the same equal ruin underwent.

      Young Lycus and Helenor only scape;
      Sav’d—how, they know not—from the steepy leap.
      Helenor, elder of the two: by birth,
      On one side royal, one a son of earth,
      Whom to the Lydian king Licymnia bare,
      And sent her boasted bastard to the war
      (A privilege which none but freemen share).
      Slight were his arms, a sword and silver shield:
      No marks of honour charg’d its empty field.
      Light as he fell, so light the youth arose,
      And rising, found himself amidst his foes;
      Nor flight was left, nor hopes to force his way.
      Embolden’d by despair, he stood at bay;
      And, like a stag, whom all the troop surrounds
      Of eager huntsmen and invading hounds
      Resolv’d on death, he dissipates his fears,
      And bounds aloft against the pointed spears:
      So dares the youth, secure of death; and throws
      His dying body on his thickest foes.
      But Lycus, swifter of his feet by far,
      Runs, doubles, winds and turns, amidst the war;
      Springs to the walls, and leaves his foes behind,
      And snatches at the beam he first can find;
      Looks up, and leaps aloft at all the stretch,
      In hopes the helping hand of some kind friend to reach.
      But Turnus follow’d hard his hunted prey
      (His spear had almost reach’d him in the way,
      Short of his reins, and scarce a span behind)
      “Fool!” said the chief, “tho’ fleeter than the wind,
      Couldst thou presume to scape, when I pursue?”
      He said, and downward by the feet he drew
      The trembling dastard; at the tug he falls;
      Vast ruins come along, rent from the smoking walls.
      Thus on some silver swan, or tim’rous hare,
      Jove’s bird comes sousing down from upper air;
      Her crooked talons truss the fearful prey:
      Then out of sight she soars, and wings her way.
      So seizes the grim wolf the tender lamb,
      In vain lamented by the bleating dam.

      Then rushing onward with a barb’rous cry,
      The troops of Turnus to the combat fly.
      The ditch with fagots fill’d, the daring foe
      Toss’d firebrands to the steepy turrets throw.

      Ilioneus, as bold Lucetius came
      To force the gate, and feed the kindling flame,
      Roll’d down the fragment of a rock so right,
      It crush’d him double underneath the weight.
      Two more young Liger and Asylas slew:
      To bend the bow young Liger better knew;
      Asylas best the pointed jav’lin threw.
      Brave Caeneus laid Ortygius on the plain;
      The victor Caeneus was by Turnus slain.
      By the same hand, Clonius and Itys fall,
      Sagar, and Ida, standing on the wall.
      From Capys’ arms his fate Privernus found:
      Hurt by Themilla first—but slight the wound—
      His shield thrown by, to mitigate the smart,
      He clapp’d his hand upon the wounded part:
      The second shaft came swift and unespied,
      And pierc’d his hand, and nail’d it to his side,
      Transfix’d his breathing lungs and beating heart:
      The soul came issuing out, and hiss’d against the dart.

      The son of Arcens shone amid the rest,
      In glitt’ring armour and a purple vest,
      (Fair was his face, his eyes inspiring love,)
      Bred by his father in the Martian grove,
      Where the fat altars of Palicus flame,
      And send in arms to purchase early fame.
      Him when he spied from far, the Tuscan king
      Laid by the lance, and took him to the sling,
      Thrice whirl’d the thong around his head, and threw:
      The heated lead half melted as it flew;
      It pierc’d his hollow temples and his brain;
      The youth came tumbling down, and spurn’d the plain.

      Then young Ascanius, who, before this day,
      Was wont in woods to shoot the savage prey,
      First bent in martial strife the twanging bow,
      And exercis’d against a human foe—
      With this bereft Numanus of his life,
      Who Turnus’ younger sister took to wife.
      Proud of his realm, and of his royal bride,
      Vaunting before his troops, and lengthen’d with a stride,
      In these insulting terms the Trojans he defied:

      “Twice-conquer’d cowards, now your shame is shown—
      Coop’d up a second time within your town!
      Who dare not issue forth in open field,
      But hold your walls before you for a shield.
      Thus treat you war? thus our alliance force?
      What gods, what madness, hither steer’d your course?
      You shall not find the sons of Atreus here,
      Nor need the frauds of sly Ulysses fear.
      Strong from the cradle, of a sturdy brood,
      We bear our newborn infants to the flood;
      There bath’d amid the stream, our boys we hold,
      With winter harden’d, and inur’d to cold.
      They wake before the day to range the wood,
      Kill ere they eat, nor taste unconquer’d food.
      No sports, but what belong to war, they know:
      To break the stubborn colt, to bend the bow.
      Our youth, of labour patient, earn their bread;
      Hardly they work, with frugal diet fed.
      From plows and harrows sent to seek renown,
      They fight in fields, and storm the shaken town.
      No part of life from toils of war is free,
      No change in age, or diff’rence in degree.
      We plow and till in arms; our oxen feel,
      Instead of goads, the spur and pointed steel;
      Th’ inverted lance makes furrows in the plain.
      Ev’n time, that changes all, yet changes us in vain:
      The body, not the mind; nor can control
      Th’ immortal vigour, or abate the soul.
      Our helms defend the young, disguise the gray:
      We live by plunder, and delight in prey.
      Your vests embroider’d with rich purple shine;
      In sloth you glory, and in dances join.
      Your vests have sweeping sleeves; with female pride
      Your turbans underneath your chins are tied.
      Go, Phrygians, to your Dindymus again!
      Go, less than women, in the shapes of men!
      Go, mix’d with eunuchs, in the Mother’s rites,
      Where with unequal sound the flute invites;
      Sing, dance, and howl, by turns, in Ida’s shade:
      Resign the war to men, who know the martial trade!”

      This foul reproach Ascanius could not hear
      With patience, or a vow’d revenge forbear.
      At the full stretch of both his hands he drew,
      And almost join’d the horns of the tough yew.
      But, first, before the throne of Jove he stood,
      And thus with lifted hands invok’d the god:
      “My first attempt, great Jupiter, succeed!
      An annual off’ring in thy grove shall bleed;
      A snow-white steer, before thy altar led,
      Who, like his mother, bears aloft his head,
      Butts with his threat’ning brows, and bellowing stands,
      And dares the fight, and spurns the yellow sands.”

      Jove bow’d the heav’ns, and lent a gracious ear,
      And thunder’d on the left, amidst the clear.
      Sounded at once the bow; and swiftly flies
      The feather’d death, and hisses thro’ the skies.
      The steel thro’ both his temples forc’d the way:
      Extended on the ground, Numanus lay.
      “Go now, vain boaster, and true valour scorn!
      The Phrygians, twice subdued, yet make this third return.”
      Ascanius said no more. The Trojans shake
      The heav’ns with shouting, and new vigour take.

      Apollo then bestrode a golden cloud,
      To view the feats of arms, and fighting crowd;
      And thus the beardless victor he bespoke aloud:
      “Advance, illustrious youth, increase in fame,
      And wide from east to west extend thy name;
      Offspring of gods thyself; and Rome shall owe
      To thee a race of demigods below.
      This is the way to heav’n: the pow’rs divine
      From this beginning date the Julian line.
      To thee, to them, and their victorious heirs,
      The conquer’d war is due, and the vast world is theirs.
      Troy is too narrow for thy name.” He said,
      And plunging downward shot his radiant head;
      Dispell’d the breathing air, that broke his flight:
      Shorn of his beams, a man to mortal sight.
      Old Butes’ form he took, Anchises’ squire,
      Now left, to rule Ascanius, by his sire:
      His wrinkled visage, and his hoary hairs,
      His mien, his habit, and his arms, he wears,
      And thus salutes the boy, too forward for his years:
      “Suffice it thee, thy father’s worthy son,
      The warlike prize thou hast already won.
      The god of archers gives thy youth a part
      Of his own praise, nor envies equal art.
      Now tempt the war no more.” He said, and flew
      Obscure in air, and vanish’d from their view.
      The Trojans, by his arms, their patron know,
      And hear the twanging of his heav’nly bow.
      Then duteous force they use, and Phoebus’ name,
      To keep from fight the youth too fond of fame.
      Undaunted, they themselves no danger shun;
      From wall to wall the shouts and clamours run.
      They bend their bows; they whirl their slings around;
      Heaps of spent arrows fall, and strew the ground;
      And helms, and shields, and rattling arms resound.
      The combat thickens, like the storm that flies
      From westward, when the show’ry Kids arise;
      Or patt’ring hail comes pouring on the main,
      When Jupiter descends in harden’d rain,
      Or bellowing clouds burst with a stormy sound,
      And with an armed winter strew the ground.

      Pand’rus and Bitias, thunderbolts of war,
      Whom Hiera to bold Alcanor bare
      On Ida’s top, two youths of height and size
      Like firs that on their mother mountain rise,
      Presuming on their force, the gates unbar,
      And of their own accord invite the war.
      With fates averse, against their king’s command,
      Arm’d, on the right and on the left they stand,
      And flank the passage: shining steel they wear,
      And waving crests above their heads appear.
      Thus two tall oaks, that Padus’ banks adorn,
      Lift up to heav’n their leafy heads unshorn,
      And, overpress’d with nature’s heavy load,
      Dance to the whistling winds, and at each other nod.
      In flows a tide of Latians, when they see
      The gate set open, and the passage free;
      Bold Quercens, with rash Tmarus, rushing on,
      Equicolus, that in bright armour shone,
      And Haemon first; but soon repuls’d they fly,
      Or in the well-defended pass they die.
      These with success are fir’d, and those with rage,
      And each on equal terms at length engage.
      Drawn from their lines, and issuing on the plain,
      The Trojans hand to hand the fight maintain.

      Fierce Turnus in another quarter fought,
      When suddenly th’ unhop’d-for news was brought,
      The foes had left the fastness of their place,
      Prevail’d in fight, and had his men in chase.
      He quits th’ attack, and, to prevent their fate,
      Runs where the giant brothers guard the gate.
      The first he met, Antiphates the brave,
      But base-begotten on a Theban slave,
      Sarpedon’s son, he slew: the deadly dart
      Found passage thro’ his breast, and pierc’d his heart.
      Fix’d in the wound th’ Italian cornel stood,
      Warm’d in his lungs, and in his vital blood.
      Aphidnus next, and Erymanthus dies,
      And Meropes, and the gigantic size
      Of Bitias, threat’ning with his ardent eyes.
      Not by the feeble dart he fell oppress’d
      (A dart were lost within that roomy breast),
      But from a knotted lance, large, heavy, strong,
      Which roar’d like thunder as it whirl’d along:
      Not two bull hides th’ impetuous force withhold,
      Nor coat of double mail, with scales of gold.
      Down sunk the monster bulk and press’d the ground;
      His arms and clatt’ring shield on the vast body sound,
      Not with less ruin than the Bajan mole,
      Rais’d on the seas, the surges to control—
      At once comes tumbling down the rocky wall;
      Prone to the deep, the stones disjointed fall
      Of the vast pile; the scatter’d ocean flies;
      Black sands, discolour’d froth, and mingled mud arise:
      The frighted billows roll, and seek the shores;
      Then trembles Prochyta, then Ischia roars:
      Typhoeus, thrown beneath, by Jove’s command,
      Astonish’d at the flaw that shakes the land,
      Soon shifts his weary side, and, scarce awake,
      With wonder feels the weight press lighter on his back.

      The warrior god the Latian troops inspir’d,
      New strung their sinews, and their courage fir’d,
      But chills the Trojan hearts with cold affright:
      Then black despair precipitates their flight.

      When Pandarus beheld his brother kill’d,
      The town with fear and wild confusion fill’d,
      He turns the hinges of the heavy gate
      With both his hands, and adds his shoulders to the weight
      Some happier friends within the walls inclos’d;
      The rest shut out, to certain death expos’d:
      Fool as he was, and frantic in his care,
      T’ admit young Turnus, and include the war!
      He thrust amid the crowd, securely bold,
      Like a fierce tiger pent amid the fold.
      Too late his blazing buckler they descry,
      And sparkling fires that shot from either eye,
      His mighty members, and his ample breast,
      His rattling armour, and his crimson crest.

      Far from that hated face the Trojans fly,
      All but the fool who sought his destiny.
      Mad Pandarus steps forth, with vengeance vow’d
      For Bitias’ death, and threatens thus aloud:
      “These are not Ardea’s walls, nor this the town
      Amata proffers with Lavinia’s crown:
      ’Tis hostile earth you tread. Of hope bereft,
      No means of safe return by flight are left.”
      To whom, with count’nance calm, and soul sedate,
      Thus Turnus: “Then begin, and try thy fate:
      My message to the ghost of Priam bear;
      Tell him a new Achilles sent thee there.”

      A lance of tough ground ash the Trojan threw,
      Rough in the rind, and knotted as it grew:
      With his full force he whirl’d it first around;
      But the soft yielding air receiv’d the wound:
      Imperial Juno turn’d the course before,
      And fix’d the wand’ring weapon in the door.

      “But hope not thou,” said Turnus, “when I strike,
      To shun thy fate: our force is not alike,
      Nor thy steel temper’d by the Lemnian god.”
      Then rising, on his utmost stretch he stood,
      And aim’d from high: the full descending blow
      Cleaves the broad front and beardless cheeks in two.
      Down sinks the giant with a thund’ring sound:
      His pond’rous limbs oppress the trembling ground;
      Blood, brains, and foam gush from the gaping wound:
      Scalp, face, and shoulders the keen steel divides,
      And the shar’d visage hangs on equal sides.
      The Trojans fly from their approaching fate;
      And, had the victor then secur’d the gate,
      And to his troops without unclos’d the bars,
      One lucky day had ended all his wars.
      But boiling youth, and blind desire of blood,
      Push’d on his fury, to pursue the crowd.
      Hamstring’d behind, unhappy Gyges died;
      Then Phalaris is added to his side.
      The pointed jav’lins from the dead he drew,
      And their friends’ arms against their fellows threw.
      Strong Halys stands in vain; weak Phlegys flies;
      Saturnia, still at hand, new force and fire supplies.
      Then Halius, Prytanis, Alcander fall—
      Engag’d against the foes who scal’d the wall:
      But, whom they fear’d without, they found within.
      At last, tho’ late, by Lynceus he was seen.
      He calls new succours, and assaults the prince:
      But weak his force, and vain is their defence.
      Turn’d to the right, his sword the hero drew,
      And at one blow the bold aggressor slew.
      He joints the neck; and, with a stroke so strong,
      The helm flies off, and bears the head along.
      Next him, the huntsman Amycus he kill’d,
      In darts envenom’d and in poison skill’d.
      Then Clytius fell beneath his fatal spear,
      And Creteus, whom the Muses held so dear:
      He fought with courage, and he sung the fight;
      Arms were his bus’ness, verses his delight.

      The Trojan chiefs behold, with rage and grief,
      Their slaughter’d friends, and hasten their relief.
      Bold Mnestheus rallies first the broken train,
      Whom brave Seresthus and his troop sustain.
      To save the living, and revenge the dead,
      Against one warrior’s arms all Troy they led.
      “O, void of sense and courage!” Mnestheus cried,
      “Where can you hope your coward heads to hide?
      Ah! where beyond these rampires can you run?
      One man, and in your camp inclos’d, you shun!
      Shall then a single sword such slaughter boast,
      And pass unpunish’d from a num’rous host?
      Forsaking honour, and renouncing fame,
      Your gods, your country, and your king you shame!”
      This just reproach their virtue does excite:
      They stand, they join, they thicken to the fight.

      Now Turnus doubts, and yet disdains to yield,
      But with slow paces measures back the field,
      And inches to the walls, where Tiber’s tide,
      Washing the camp, defends the weaker side.
      The more he loses, they advance the more,
      And tread in ev’ry step he trod before.
      They shout: they bear him back; and, whom by might
      They cannot conquer, they oppress with weight.

      As, compass’d with a wood of spears around,
      The lordly lion still maintains his ground;
      Grins horrible, retires, and turns again;
      Threats his distended paws, and shakes his mane;
      He loses while in vain he presses on,
      Nor will his courage let him dare to run:
      So Turnus fares, and, unresolved of flight,
      Moves tardy back, and just recedes from fight.
      Yet twice, enrag’d, the combat he renews,
      Twice breaks, and twice his broken foes pursues.
      But now they swarm, and, with fresh troops supplied,
      Come rolling on, and rush from ev’ry side:
      Nor Juno, who sustain’d his arms before,
      Dares with new strength suffice th’ exhausted store;
      For Jove, with sour commands, sent Iris down,
      To force th’ invader from the frighted town.

      With labour spent, no longer can he wield
      The heavy falchion, or sustain the shield,
      O’erwhelm’d with darts, which from afar they fling:
      The weapons round his hollow temples ring;
      His golden helm gives way, with stony blows
      Batter’d, and flat, and beaten to his brows.
      His crest is rash’d away; his ample shield
      Is falsified, and round with jav’lins fill’d.

      The foe, now faint, the Trojans overwhelm;
      And Mnestheus lays hard load upon his helm.
      Sick sweat succeeds; he drops at ev’ry pore;
      With driving dust his cheeks are pasted o’er;
      Shorter and shorter ev’ry gasp he takes;
      And vain efforts and hurtless blows he makes.
      Plung’d in the flood, and made the waters fly.
      The yellow god the welcome burthen bore,
      And wip’d the sweat, and wash’d away the gore;
      Then gently wafts him to the farther coast,
      And sends him safe to cheer his anxious host.



 

      The gates of heav’n unfold: Jove summons all
      The gods to council in the common hall.
      Sublimely seated, he surveys from far
      The fields, the camp, the fortune of the war,
      And all th’ inferior world. From first to last,
      The sov’reign senate in degrees are plac’d.

      Then thus th’ almighty sire began: “Ye gods,
      Natives or denizens of blest abodes,
      From whence these murmurs, and this change of mind,
      This backward fate from what was first design’d?
      Why this protracted war, when my commands
      Pronounc’d a peace, and gave the Latian lands?
      What fear or hope on either part divides
      Our heav’ns, and arms our powers on diff’rent sides?
      A lawful time of war at length will come,
      (Nor need your haste anticipate the doom),
      When Carthage shall contend the world with Rome,
      Shall force the rigid rocks and Alpine chains,
      And, like a flood, come pouring on the plains.
      Then is your time for faction and debate,
      For partial favour, and permitted hate.
      Let now your immature dissension cease;
      Sit quiet, and compose your souls to peace.”

      Thus Jupiter in few unfolds the charge;
      But lovely Venus thus replies at large:
      “O pow’r immense, eternal energy,
      (For to what else protection can we fly?)
      Seest thou the proud Rutulians, how they dare
      In fields, unpunish’d, and insult my care?
      How lofty Turnus vaunts amidst his train,
      In shining arms, triumphant on the plain?
      Ev’n in their lines and trenches they contend,
      And scarce their walls the Trojan troops defend:
      The town is fill’d with slaughter, and o’erfloats,
      With a red deluge, their increasing moats.
      Aeneas, ignorant, and far from thence,
      Has left a camp expos’d, without defence.
      This endless outrage shall they still sustain?
      Shall Troy renew’d be forc’d and fir’d again?
      A second siege my banish’d issue fears,
      And a new Diomede in arms appears.
      One more audacious mortal will be found;
      And I, thy daughter, wait another wound.
      Yet, if with fates averse, without thy leave,
      The Latian lands my progeny receive,
      Bear they the pains of violated law,
      And thy protection from their aid withdraw.
      But, if the gods their sure success foretell;
      If those of heav’n consent with those of hell,
      To promise Italy; who dare debate
      The pow’r of Jove, or fix another fate?
      What should I tell of tempests on the main,
      Of Aeolus usurping Neptune’s reign?
      Of Iris sent, with Bacchanalian heat
      T’ inspire the matrons, and destroy the fleet?
      Now Juno to the Stygian sky descends,
      Solicits hell for aid, and arms the fiends.
      That new example wanted yet above:
      An act that well became the wife of Jove!
      Alecto, rais’d by her, with rage inflames
      The peaceful bosoms of the Latian dames.
      Imperial sway no more exalts my mind;
      (Such hopes I had indeed, while Heav’n was kind;)
      Now let my happier foes possess my place,
      Whom Jove prefers before the Trojan race;
      And conquer they, whom you with conquest grace.
      Since you can spare, from all your wide command,
      No spot of earth, no hospitable land,
      Which may my wand’ring fugitives receive;
      (Since haughty Juno will not give you leave;)
      Then, father, (if I still may use that name,)
      By ruin’d Troy, yet smoking from the flame,
      I beg you, let Ascanius, by my care,
      Be freed from danger, and dismiss’d the war:
      Inglorious let him live, without a crown.
      The father may be cast on coasts unknown,
      Struggling with fate; but let me save the son.
      Mine is Cythera, mine the Cyprian tow’rs:
      In those recesses, and those sacred bow’rs,
      Obscurely let him rest; his right resign
      To promis’d empire, and his Julian line.
      Then Carthage may th’ Ausonian towns destroy,
      Nor fear the race of a rejected boy.
      What profits it my son to scape the fire,
      Arm’d with his gods, and loaded with his sire;
      To pass the perils of the seas and wind;
      Evade the Greeks, and leave the war behind;
      To reach th’ Italian shores; if, after all,
      Our second Pergamus is doom’d to fall?
      Much better had he curb’d his high desires,
      And hover’d o’er his ill-extinguish’d fires.
      To Simois’ banks the fugitives restore,
      And give them back to war, and all the woes before.”

      Deep indignation swell’d Saturnia’s heart:
      “And must I own,” she said, “my secret smart—
      What with more decence were in silence kept,
      And, but for this unjust reproach, had slept?
      Did god or man your fav’rite son advise,
      With war unhop’d the Latians to surprise?
      By fate, you boast, and by the gods’ decree,
      He left his native land for Italy!
      Confess the truth; by mad Cassandra, more
      Than Heav’n inspir’d, he sought a foreign shore!
      Did I persuade to trust his second Troy
      To the raw conduct of a beardless boy,
      With walls unfinish’d, which himself forsakes,
      And thro’ the waves a wand’ring voyage takes?
      When have I urg’d him meanly to demand
      The Tuscan aid, and arm a quiet land?
      Did I or Iris give this mad advice,
      Or made the fool himself the fatal choice?
      You think it hard, the Latians should destroy
      With swords your Trojans, and with fires your Troy!
      Hard and unjust indeed, for men to draw
      Their native air, nor take a foreign law!
      That Turnus is permitted still to live,
      To whom his birth a god and goddess give!
      But yet is just and lawful for your line
      To drive their fields, and force with fraud to join;
      Realms, not your own, among your clans divide,
      And from the bridegroom tear the promis’d bride;
      Petition, while you public arms prepare;
      Pretend a peace, and yet provoke a war!
      ’Twas giv’n to you, your darling son to shroud,
      To draw the dastard from the fighting crowd,
      And, for a man, obtend an empty cloud.
      From flaming fleets you turn’d the fire away,
      And chang’d the ships to daughters of the sea.
      But is my crime—the Queen of Heav’n offends,
      If she presume to save her suff’ring friends!
      Your son, not knowing what his foes decree,
      You say, is absent: absent let him be.
      Yours is Cythera, yours the Cyprian tow’rs,
      The soft recesses, and the sacred bow’rs.
      Why do you then these needless arms prepare,
      And thus provoke a people prone to war?
      Did I with fire the Trojan town deface,
      Or hinder from return your exil’d race?
      Was I the cause of mischief, or the man
      Whose lawless lust the fatal war began?
      Think on whose faith th’ adult’rous youth relied;
      Who promis’d, who procur’d, the Spartan bride?
      When all th’ united states of Greece combin’d,
      To purge the world of the perfidious kind,
      Then was your time to fear the Trojan fate:
      Your quarrels and complaints are now too late.”

      Thus Juno. Murmurs rise, with mix’d applause,
      Just as they favour or dislike the cause.
      So winds, when yet unfledg’d in woods they lie,
      In whispers first their tender voices try,
      Then issue on the main with bellowing rage,
      And storms to trembling mariners presage.

      Then thus to both replied th’ imperial god,
      Who shakes heav’n’s axles with his awful nod.
      (When he begins, the silent senate stand
      With rev’rence, list’ning to the dread command:
      The clouds dispel; the winds their breath restrain;
      And the hush’d waves lie flatted on the main.)
      “Celestials, your attentive ears incline!
      Since,” said the god, “the Trojans must not join
      In wish’d alliance with the Latian line;
      Since endless jarrings and immortal hate
      Tend but to discompose our happy state;
      The war henceforward be resign’d to fate:
      Each to his proper fortune stand or fall;
      Equal and unconcern’d I look on all.
      Rutulians, Trojans, are the same to me;
      And both shall draw the lots their fates decree.
      Let these assault, if Fortune be their friend;
      And, if she favours those, let those defend:
      The Fates will find their way.” The Thund’rer said,
      And shook the sacred honours of his head,
      Attesting Styx, th’ inviolable flood,
      And the black regions of his brother god.
      Trembled the poles of heav’n, and earth confess’d the nod.
      This end the sessions had: the senate rise,
      And to his palace wait their sov’reign thro’ the skies.

      Meantime, intent upon their siege, the foes
      Within their walls the Trojan host inclose:
      They wound, they kill, they watch at ev’ry gate;
      Renew the fires, and urge their happy fate.

      Th’ Aeneans wish in vain their wanted chief,
      Hopeless of flight, more hopeless of relief.
      Thin on the tow’rs they stand; and ev’n those few
      A feeble, fainting, and dejected crew.
      Yet in the face of danger some there stood:
      The two bold brothers of Sarpedon’s blood,
      Asius and Acmon; both th’ Assaraci;
      Young Haemon, and tho’ young, resolv’d to die.
      With these were Clarus and Thymoetes join’d;
      Tibris and Castor, both of Lycian kind.
      From Acmon’s hands a rolling stone there came,
      So large, it half deserv’d a mountain’s name:
      Strong-sinew’d was the youth, and big of bone;
      His brother Mnestheus could not more have done,
      Or the great father of th’ intrepid son.
      Some firebrands throw, some flights of arrows send;
      And some with darts, and some with stones defend.

      Amid the press appears the beauteous boy,
      The care of Venus, and the hope of Troy.
      His lovely face unarm’d, his head was bare;
      In ringlets o’er his shoulders hung his hair.
      His forehead circled with a diadem;
      Distinguish’d from the crowd, he shines a gem,
      Enchas’d in gold, or polish’d iv’ry set,
      Amidst the meaner foil of sable jet.

      Nor Ismarus was wanting to the war,
      Directing pointed arrows from afar,
      And death with poison arm’d—in Lydia born,
      Where plenteous harvests the fat fields adorn;
      Where proud Pactolus floats the fruitful lands,
      And leaves a rich manure of golden sands.
      There Capys, author of the Capuan name,
      And there was Mnestheus too, increas’d in fame,
      Since Turnus from the camp he cast with shame.

      Thus mortal war was wag’d on either side.
      Meantime the hero cuts the nightly tide:
      For, anxious, from Evander when he went,
      He sought the Tyrrhene camp, and Tarchon’s tent;
      Expos’d the cause of coming to the chief;
      His name and country told, and ask’d relief;
      Propos’d the terms; his own small strength declar’d;
      What vengeance proud Mezentius had prepar’d:
      What Turnus, bold and violent, design’d;
      Then shew’d the slipp’ry state of humankind,
      And fickle fortune; warn’d him to beware,
      And to his wholesome counsel added pray’r.
      Tarchon, without delay, the treaty signs,
      And to the Trojan troops the Tuscan joins.

      They soon set sail; nor now the fates withstand;
      Their forces trusted with a foreign hand.
      Aeneas leads; upon his stern appear
      Two lions carv’d, which rising Ida bear—
      Ida, to wand’ring Trojans ever dear.
      Under their grateful shade Aeneas sate,
      Revolving war’s events, and various fate.
      His left young Pallas kept, fix’d to his side,
      And oft of winds enquir’d, and of the tide;
      Oft of the stars, and of their wat’ry way;
      And what he suffer’d both by land and sea.

      Now, sacred sisters, open all your spring!
      The Tuscan leaders, and their army sing,
      Which follow’d great Aeneas to the war:
      Their arms, their numbers, and their names declare.

      A thousand youths brave Massicus obey,
      Borne in the Tiger thro’ the foaming sea;
      From Asium brought, and Cosa, by his care:
      For arms, light quivers, bows and shafts, they bear.
      Fierce Abas next: his men bright armour wore;
      His stern Apollo’s golden statue bore.
      Six hundred Populonia sent along,
      All skill’d in martial exercise, and strong.
      Three hundred more for battle Ilva joins,
      An isle renown’d for steel, and unexhausted mines.
      Asylas on his prow the third appears,
      Who heav’n interprets, and the wand’ring stars;
      From offer’d entrails prodigies expounds,
      And peals of thunder, with presaging sounds.
      A thousand spears in warlike order stand,
      Sent by the Pisans under his command.

      Fair Astur follows in the wat’ry field,
      Proud of his manag’d horse and painted shield.
      Gravisca, noisome from the neighb’ring fen,
      And his own Caere, sent three hundred men;
      With those which Minio’s fields and Pyrgi gave,
      All bred in arms, unanimous, and brave.

      Thou, Muse, the name of Cinyras renew,
      And brave Cupavo follow’d but by few;
      Whose helm confess’d the lineage of the man,
      And bore, with wings display’d, a silver swan.
      Love was the fault of his fam’d ancestry,
      Whose forms and fortunes in his ensigns fly.
      For Cycnus lov’d unhappy Phaeton,
      And sung his loss in poplar groves, alone,
      Beneath the sister shades, to soothe his grief.
      Heav’n heard his song, and hasten’d his relief,
      And chang’d to snowy plumes his hoary hair,
      And wing’d his flight, to chant aloft in air.
      His son Cupavo brush’d the briny flood:
      Upon his stern a brawny Centaur stood,
      Who heav’d a rock, and, threat’ning still to throw,
      With lifted hands alarm’d the seas below:
      They seem’d to fear the formidable sight,
      And roll’d their billows on, to speed his flight.

      Ocnus was next, who led his native train
      Of hardy warriors thro’ the wat’ry plain:
      The son of Manto by the Tuscan stream,
      From whence the Mantuan town derives the name—
      An ancient city, but of mix’d descent:
      Three sev’ral tribes compose the government;
      Four towns are under each; but all obey
      The Mantuan laws, and own the Tuscan sway.

      Hate to Mezentius arm’d five hundred more,
      Whom Mincius from his sire Benacus bore:
      Mincius, with wreaths of reeds his forehead cover’d o’er.
      These grave Auletes leads: a hundred sweep
      With stretching oars at once the glassy deep.
      Him and his martial train the Triton bears;
      High on his poop the sea-green god appears:
      Frowning he seems his crooked shell to sound,
      And at the blast the billows dance around.
      A hairy man above the waist he shows;
      A porpoise tail beneath his belly grows;
      And ends a fish: his breast the waves divides,
      And froth and foam augment the murm’ring tides.

      Full thirty ships transport the chosen train
      For Troy’s relief, and scour the briny main.

      Now was the world forsaken by the sun,
      And Phoebe half her nightly race had run.
      The careful chief, who never clos’d his eyes,
      Himself the rudder holds, the sails supplies.
      A choir of Nereids meet him on the flood,
      Once his own galleys, hewn from Ida’s wood;
      But now, as many nymphs, the sea they sweep,
      As rode, before, tall vessels on the deep.
      They know him from afar; and in a ring
      Enclose the ship that bore the Trojan king.
      Cymodoce, whose voice excell’d the rest,
      Above the waves advanc’d her snowy breast;
      Her right hand stops the stern; her left divides
      The curling ocean, and corrects the tides.
      She spoke for all the choir, and thus began
      With pleasing words to warn th’ unknowing man:
      “Sleeps our lov’d lord? O goddess-born, awake!
      Spread ev’ry sail, pursue your wat’ry track,
      And haste your course. Your navy once were we,
      From Ida’s height descending to the sea;
      Till Turnus, as at anchor fix’d we stood,
      Presum’d to violate our holy wood.
      Then, loos’d from shore, we fled his fires profane
      (Unwillingly we broke our master’s chain),
      And since have sought you thro’ the Tuscan main.
      The mighty Mother chang’d our forms to these,
      And gave us life immortal in the seas.
      But young Ascanius, in his camp distress’d,
      By your insulting foes is hardly press’d.
      Th’ Arcadian horsemen, and Etrurian host,
      Advance in order on the Latian coast:
      To cut their way the Daunian chief designs,
      Before their troops can reach the Trojan lines.
      Thou, when the rosy morn restores the light,
      First arm thy soldiers for th’ ensuing fight:
      Thyself the fated sword of Vulcan wield,
      And bear aloft th’ impenetrable shield.
      Tomorrow’s sun, unless my skill be vain,
      Shall see huge heaps of foes in battle slain.”
      Parting, she spoke; and with immortal force
      Push’d on the vessel in her wat’ry course;
      For well she knew the way. Impell’d behind,
      The ship flew forward, and outstripp’d the wind.
      The rest make up. Unknowing of the cause,
      The chief admires their speed, and happy omens draws.

      Then thus he pray’d, and fix’d on heav’n his eyes:
      “Hear thou, great Mother of the deities.
      With turrets crown’d! (on Ida’s holy hill
      Fierce tigers, rein’d and curb’d, obey thy will.)
      Firm thy own omens; lead us on to fight;
      And let thy Phrygians conquer in thy right.”

      He said no more. And now renewing day
      Had chas’d the shadows of the night away.
      He charg’d the soldiers, with preventing care,
      Their flags to follow, and their arms prepare;
      Warn’d of th’ ensuing fight, and bade ’em hope the war.
      Now, his lofty poop, he view’d below
      His camp incompass’d, and th’ inclosing foe.
      His blazing shield, imbrac’d, he held on high;
      The camp receive the sign, and with loud shouts reply.
      Hope arms their courage: from their tow’rs they throw
      Their darts with double force, and drive the foe.
      Thus, at the signal giv’n, the cranes arise
      Before the stormy south, and blacken all the skies.

      King Turnus wonder’d at the fight renew’d,
      Till, looking back, the Trojan fleet he view’d,
      The seas with swelling canvas cover’d o’er,
      And the swift ships descending on the shore.
      The Latians saw from far, with dazzled eyes,
      The radiant crest that seem’d in flames to rise,
      And dart diffusive fires around the field,
      And the keen glitt’ring of the golden shield.
      Thus threat’ning comets, when by night they rise,
      Shoot sanguine streams, and sadden all the skies:
      So Sirius, flashing forth sinister lights,
      Pale humankind with plagues and with dry famine fright:

      Yet Turnus with undaunted mind is bent
      To man the shores, and hinder their descent,
      And thus awakes the courage of his friends:
      “What you so long have wish’d, kind Fortune sends;
      In ardent arms to meet th’ invading foe:
      You find, and find him at advantage now.
      Yours is the day: you need but only dare;
      Your swords will make you masters of the war.
      Your sires, your sons, your houses, and your lands,
      And dearest wifes, are all within your hands.
      Be mindful of the race from whence you came,
      And emulate in arms your fathers’ fame.
      Now take the time, while stagg’ring yet they stand
      With feet unfirm, and prepossess the strand:
      Fortune befriends the bold.” Nor more he said,
      But balanc’d whom to leave, and whom to lead;
      Then these elects, the landing to prevent;
      And those he leaves, to keep the city pent.

      Meantime the Trojan sends his troops ashore:
      Some are by boats expos’d, by bridges more.
      With lab’ring oars they bear along the strand,
      Where the tide languishes, and leap a-land.
      Tarchon observes the coast with careful eyes,
      And, where no ford he finds, no water fries,
      Nor billows with unequal murmurs roar,
      But smoothly slide along, and swell the shore,
      That course he steer’d, and thus he gave command:
      “Here ply your oars, and at all hazard land:
      Force on the vessel, that her keel may wound
      This hated soil, and furrow hostile ground.
      Let me securely land—I ask no more;
      Then sink my ships, or shatter on the shore.”

      This fiery speech inflames his fearful friends:
      They tug at ev’ry oar, and ev’ry stretcher bends;
      They run their ships aground; the vessels knock,
      (Thus forc’d ashore,) and tremble with the shock.
      Tarchon’s alone was lost, that stranded stood,
      Stuck on a bank, and beaten by the flood:
      She breaks her back; the loosen’d sides give way,
      And plunge the Tuscan soldiers in the sea.
      Their broken oars and floating planks withstand
      Their passage, while they labour to the land,
      And ebbing tides bear back upon th’ uncertain sand.

      Now Turnus leads his troops without delay,
      Advancing to the margin of the sea.
      The trumpets sound: Aeneas first assail’d
      The clowns new-rais’d and raw, and soon prevail’d.
      Great Theron fell, an omen of the fight;
      Great Theron, large of limbs, of giant height.
      He first in open field defied the prince:
      But armour scal’d with gold was no defence
      Against the fated sword, which open’d wide
      His plated shield, and pierc’d his naked side.
      Next, Lichas fell, who, not like others born,
      Was from his wretched mother ripp’d and torn;
      Sacred, O Phoebus, from his birth to thee;
      For his beginning life from biting steel was free.
      Not far from him was Gyas laid along,
      Of monstrous bulk; with Cisseus fierce and strong:
      Vain bulk and strength! for, when the chief assail’d,
      Nor valour nor Herculean arms avail’d,
      Nor their fam’d father, wont in war to go
      With great Alcides, while he toil’d below.
      The noisy Pharos next receiv’d his death:
      Aeneas writh’d his dart, and stopp’d his bawling breath.
      Then wretched Cydon had receiv’d his doom,
      Who courted Clytius in his beardless bloom,
      And sought with lust obscene polluted joys:
      The Trojan sword had curd his love of boys,
      Had not his sev’n bold brethren stopp’d the course
      Of the fierce champions, with united force.
      Sev’n darts were thrown at once; and some rebound
      From his bright shield, some on his helmet sound:
      The rest had reach’d him; but his mother’s care
      Prevented those, and turn’d aside in air.

      The prince then call’d Achates, to supply
      The spears that knew the way to victory—
      “Those fatal weapons, which, inur’d to blood,
      In Grecian bodies under Ilium stood:
      Not one of those my hand shall toss in vain
      Against our foes, on this contended plain.”
      He said; then seiz’d a mighty spear, and threw;
      Which, wing’d with fate, thro’ Maeon’s buckler flew,
      Pierc’d all the brazen plates, and reach’d his heart:
      He stagger’d with intolerable smart.
      Alcanor saw; and reach’d, but reach’d in vain,
      His helping hand, his brother to sustain.
      A second spear, which kept the former course,
      From the same hand, and sent with equal force,
      His right arm pierc’d, and holding on, bereft
      His use of both, and pinion’d down his left.
      Then Numitor from his dead brother drew
      Th’ ill-omen’d spear, and at the Trojan threw:
      Preventing fate directs the lance awry,
      Which, glancing, only mark’d Achates’ thigh.

      In pride of youth the Sabine Clausus came,
      And, from afar, at Dryops took his aim.
      The spear flew hissing thro’ the middle space,
      And pierc’d his throat, directed at his face;
      It stopp’d at once the passage of his wind,
      And the free soul to flitting air resign’d:
      His forehead was the first that struck the ground;
      Lifeblood and life rush’d mingled thro’ the wound.
      He slew three brothers of the Borean race,
      And three, whom Ismarus, their native place,
      Had sent to war, but all the sons of Thrace.
      Halesus, next, the bold Aurunci leads:
      The son of Neptune to his aid succeeds,
      Conspicuous on his horse. On either hand,
      These fight to keep, and those to win, the land.
      With mutual blood th’ Ausonian soil is dyed,
      While on its borders each their claim decide.
      As wintry winds, contending in the sky,
      With equal force of lungs their titles try:
      They rage, they roar; the doubtful rack of heav’n
      Stands without motion, and the tide undriv’n:
      Each bent to conquer, neither side to yield,
      They long suspend the fortune of the field.
      Both armies thus perform what courage can;
      Foot set to foot, and mingled man to man.

      But, in another part, th’ Arcadian horse
      With ill success engage the Latin force:
      For, where th’ impetuous torrent, rushing down,
      Huge craggy stones and rooted trees had thrown,
      They left their coursers, and, unus’d to fight
      On foot, were scatter’d in a shameful flight.
      Pallas, who with disdain and grief had view’d
      His foes pursuing, and his friends pursued,
      Us’d threat’nings mix’d with pray’rs, his last resource,
      With these to move their minds, with those to fire their force
      “Which way, companions? whether would you run?
      By you yourselves, and mighty battles won,
      By my great sire, by his establish’d name,
      And early promise of my future fame;
      By my youth, emulous of equal right
      To share his honours—shun ignoble flight!
      Trust not your feet: your hands must hew way
      Thro’ yon black body, and that thick array:
      ’Tis thro’ that forward path that we must come;
      There lies our way, and that our passage home.
      Nor pow’rs above, nor destinies below
      Oppress our arms: with equal strength we go,
      With mortal hands to meet a mortal foe.
      See on what foot we stand: a scanty shore,
      The sea behind, our enemies before;
      No passage left, unless we swim the main;
      Or, forcing these, the Trojan trenches gain.”
      This said, he strode with eager haste along,
      And bore amidst the thickest of the throng.
      Lagus, the first he met, with fate to foe,
      Had heav’d a stone of mighty weight, to throw:
      Stooping, the spear descended on his chine,
      Just where the bone distinguished either loin:
      It stuck so fast, so deeply buried lay,
      That scarce the victor forc’d the steel away.
      Hisbon came on: but, while he mov’d too slow
      To wish’d revenge, the prince prevents his blow;
      For, warding his at once, at once he press’d,
      And plung’d the fatal weapon in his breast.
      Then lewd Anchemolus he laid in dust,
      Who stain’d his stepdam’s bed with impious lust.
      And, after him, the Daucian twins were slain,
      Laris and Thymbrus, on the Latian plain;
      So wondrous like in feature, shape, and size,
      As caus’d an error in their parents’ eyes—
      Grateful mistake! but soon the sword decides
      The nice distinction, and their fate divides:
      For Thymbrus’ head was lopp’d; and Laris’ hand,
      Dismember’d, sought its owner on the strand:
      The trembling fingers yet the falchion strain,
      And threaten still th’ intended stroke in vain.

      Now, to renew the charge, th’ Arcadians came:
      Sight of such acts, and sense of honest shame,
      And grief, with anger mix’d, their minds inflame.
      Then, with a casual blow was Rhoeteus slain,
      Who chanc’d, as Pallas threw, to cross the plain:
      The flying spear was after Ilus sent;
      But Rhoeteus happen’d on a death unmeant:
      From Teuthras and from Tyres while he fled,
      The lance, athwart his body, laid him dead:
      Roll’d from his chariot with a mortal wound,
      And intercepted fate, he spurn’d the ground.
      As when, in summer, welcome winds arise,
      The watchful shepherd to the forest flies,
      And fires the midmost plants; contagion spreads,
      And catching flames infect the neighb’ring heads;
      Around the forest flies the furious blast,
      And all the leafy nation sinks at last,
      And Vulcan rides in triumph o’er the waste;
      The pastor, pleas’d with his dire victory,
      Beholds the satiate flames in sheets ascend the sky:
      So Pallas’ troops their scatter’d strength unite,
      And, pouring on their foes, their prince delight.

      Halesus came, fierce with desire of blood;
      But first collected in his arms he stood:
      Advancing then, he plied the spear so well,
      Ladon, Demodocus, and Pheres fell.
      Around his head he toss’d his glitt’ring brand,
      And from Strymonius hew’d his better hand,
      Held up to guard his throat; then hurl’d a stone
      At Thoas’ ample front, and pierc’d the bone:
      It struck beneath the space of either eye;
      And blood, and mingled brains, together fly.
      Deep skill’d in future fates, Halesus’ sire
      Did with the youth to lonely groves retire:
      But, when the father’s mortal race was run,
      Dire destiny laid hold upon the son,
      And haul’d him to the war, to find, beneath
      Th’ Evandrian spear, a memorable death.
      Pallas th’ encounter seeks, but, ere he throws,
      To Tuscan Tiber thus address’d his vows:
      “O sacred stream, direct my flying dart,
      And give to pass the proud Halesus’ heart!
      His arms and spoils thy holy oak shall bear.”
      Pleas’d with the bribe, the god receiv’d his pray’r:
      For, while his shield protects a friend distress’d,
      The dart came driving on, and pierc’d his breast.

      But Lausus, no small portion of the war,
      Permits not panic fear to reign too far,
      Caus’d by the death of so renown’d a knight;
      But by his own example cheers the fight.
      Fierce Abas first he slew; Abas, the stay
      Of Trojan hopes, and hindrance of the day.
      The Phrygian troops escap’d the Greeks in vain:
      They, and their mix’d allies, now load the plain.
      To the rude shock of war both armies came;
      Their leaders equal, and their strength the same.
      The rear so press’d the front, they could not wield
      Their angry weapons, to dispute the field.
      Here Pallas urges on, and Lausus there:
      Of equal youth and beauty both appear,
      But both by fate forbid to breathe their native air.
      Their congress in the field great Jove withstands:
      Both doom’d to fall, but fall by greater hands.

      Meantime Juturna warns the Daunian chief
      Of Lausus’ danger, urging swift relief.
      With his driv’n chariot he divides the crowd,
      And, making to his friends, thus calls aloud:
      “Let none presume his needless aid to join;
      Retire, and clear the field; the fight is mine:
      To this right hand is Pallas only due;
      O were his father here, my just revenge to view!”
      From the forbidden space his men retir’d.
      Pallas their awe, and his stern words, admir’d;
      Survey’d him o’er and o’er with wond’ring sight,
      Struck with his haughty mien, and tow’ring height.
      Then to the king: “Your empty vaunts forbear;
      Success I hope, and fate I cannot fear;
      Alive or dead, I shall deserve a name;
      Jove is impartial, and to both the same.”
      He said, and to the void advanc’d his pace:
      Pale horror sate on each Arcadian face.
      Then Turnus, from his chariot leaping light,
      Address’d himself on foot to single fight.
      And, as a lion—when he spies from far
      A bull that seems to meditate the war,
      Bending his neck, and spurning back the sand—
      Runs roaring downward from his hilly stand:
      Imagine eager Turnus not more slow,
      To rush from high on his unequal foe.

      Young Pallas, when he saw the chief advance
      Within due distance of his flying lance,
      Prepares to charge him first, resolv’d to try
      If fortune would his want of force supply;
      And thus to Heav’n and Hercules address’d:
      “Alcides, once on earth Evander’s guest,
      His son adjures you by those holy rites,
      That hospitable board, those genial nights;
      Assist my great attempt to gain this prize,
      And let proud Turnus view, with dying eyes,
      His ravish’d spoils.” ’Twas heard, the vain request;
      Alcides mourn’d, and stifled sighs within his breast.
      Then Jove, to soothe his sorrow, thus began:
      “Short bounds of life are set to mortal man.
      ’Tis virtue’s work alone to stretch the narrow span.
      So many sons of gods, in bloody fight,
      Around the walls of Troy, have lost the light:
      My own Sarpedon fell beneath his foe;
      Nor I, his mighty sire, could ward the blow.
      Ev’n Turnus shortly shall resign his breath,
      And stands already on the verge of death.”
      This said, the god permits the fatal fight,
      But from the Latian fields averts his sight.

      Now with full force his spear young Pallas threw,
      And, having thrown, his shining falchion drew
      The steel just graz’d along the shoulder joint,
      And mark’d it slightly with the glancing point,
      Fierce Turnus first to nearer distance drew,
      And pois’d his pointed spear, before he threw:
      Then, as the winged weapon whizz’d along,
      “See now,” said he, “whose arm is better strung.”
      The spear kept on the fatal course, unstay’d
      By plates of ir’n, which o’er the shield were laid:
      Thro’ folded brass and tough bull hides it pass’d,
      His corslet pierc’d, and reach’d his heart at last.
      In vain the youth tugs at the broken wood;
      The soul comes issuing with the vital blood:
      He falls; his arms upon his body sound;
      And with his bloody teeth he bites the ground.

      Turnus bestrode the corpse: “Arcadians, hear,”
      Said he; “my message to your master bear:
      Such as the sire deserv’d, the son I send;
      It costs him dear to be the Phrygians’ friend.
      The lifeless body, tell him, I bestow,
      Unask’d, to rest his wand’ring ghost below.”
      He said, and trampled down with all the force
      Of his left foot, and spurn’d the wretched corse;
      Then snatch’d the shining belt, with gold inlaid;
      The belt Eurytion’s artful hands had made,
      Where fifty fatal brides, express’d to sight,
      All in the compass of one mournful night,
      Depriv’d their bridegrooms of returning light.

      In an ill hour insulting Turnus tore
      Those golden spoils, and in a worse he wore.
      O mortals, blind in fate, who never know
      To bear high fortune, or endure the low!
      The time shall come, when Turnus, but in vain,
      Shall wish untouch’d the trophies of the slain;
      Shall wish the fatal belt were far away,
      And curse the dire remembrance of the day.

      The sad Arcadians, from th’ unhappy field,
      Bear back the breathless body on a shield.
      O grace and grief of war! at once restor’d,
      With praises, to thy sire, at once deplor’d!
      One day first sent thee to the fighting field,
      Beheld whole heaps of foes in battle kill’d;
      One day beheld thee dead, and borne upon thy shield.
      This dismal news, not from uncertain fame,
      But sad spectators, to the hero came:
      His friends upon the brink of ruin stand,
      Unless reliev’d by his victorious hand.
      He whirls his sword around, without delay,
      And hews thro’ adverse foes an ample way,
      To find fierce Turnus, of his conquest proud:
      Evander, Pallas, all that friendship ow’d
      To large deserts, are present to his eyes;
      His plighted hand, and hospitable ties.

      Four sons of Sulmo, four whom Ufens bred,
      He took in fight, and living victims led,
      To please the ghost of Pallas, and expire,
      In sacrifice, before his fun’ral fire.
      At Magus next he threw: he stoop’d below
      The flying spear, and shunn’d the promis’d blow;
      Then, creeping, clasp’d the hero’s knees, and pray’d:
      “By young Iulus, by thy father’s shade,
      O spare my life, and send me back to see
      My longing sire, and tender progeny!
      A lofty house I have, and wealth untold,
      In silver ingots, and in bars of gold:
      All these, and sums besides, which see no day,
      The ransom of this one poor life shall pay.
      If I survive, will Troy the less prevail?
      A single soul’s too light to turn the scale.”
      He said. The hero sternly thus replied:
      “Thy bars and ingots, and the sums beside,
      Leave for thy children’s lot. Thy Turnus broke
      All rules of war by one relentless stroke,
      When Pallas fell: so deems, nor deems alone
      My father’s shadow, but my living son.”
      Thus having said, of kind remorse bereft,
      He seiz’d his helm, and dragg’d him with his left;
      Then with his right hand, while his neck he wreath’d,
      Up to the hilts his shining falchion sheath’d.

      Apollo’s priest, Emonides, was near;
      His holy fillets on his front appear;
      Glitt’ring in arms, he shone amidst the crowd;
      Much of his god, more of his purple, proud.
      Him the fierce Trojan follow’d thro’ the field:
      The holy coward fell; and, forc’d to yield,
      The prince stood o’er the priest, and, at one blow,
      Sent him an off’ring to the shades below.
      His arms Seresthus on his shoulders bears,
      Design’d a trophy to the God of Wars.

      Vulcanian Caeculus renews the fight,
      And Umbro, born upon the mountains’ height.
      The champion cheers his troops t’ encounter those,
      And seeks revenge himself on other foes.
      At Anxur’s shield he drove; and, at the blow,
      Both shield and arm to ground together go.
      Anxur had boasted much of magic charms,
      And thought he wore impenetrable arms,
      So made by mutter’d spells; and, from the spheres,
      Had life secur’d, in vain, for length of years.
      Then Tarquitus the field in triumph trod;
      A nymph his mother, his sire a god.
      Exulting in bright arms, he braves the prince:
      With his protended lance he makes defence;
      Bears back his feeble foe; then, pressing on,
      Arrests his better hand, and drags him down;
      Stands o’er the prostrate wretch, and, as he lay,
      Vain tales inventing, and prepar’d to pray,
      Mows off his head: the trunk a moment stood,
      Then sunk, and roll’d along the sand in blood.
      The vengeful victor thus upbraids the slain:
      “Lie there, proud man, unpitied, on the plain;
      Lie there, inglorious, and without a tomb,
      Far from thy mother and thy native home,
      Exposed to savage beasts, and birds of prey,
      Or thrown for food to monsters of the sea.”

      On Lycas and Antaeus next he ran,
      Two chiefs of Turnus, and who led his van.
      They fled for fear; with these, he chas’d along
      Camers the yellow-lock’d, and Numa strong;
      Both great in arms, and both were fair and young.
      Camers was son to Volscens lately slain,
      In wealth surpassing all the Latian train,
      And in Amycla fix’d his silent easy reign.
      And, as Aegaeon, when with heav’n he strove,
      Stood opposite in arms to mighty Jove;
      Mov’d all his hundred hands, provok’d the war,
      Defied the forky lightning from afar;
      At fifty mouths his flaming breath expires,
      And flash for flash returns, and fires for fires;
      In his right hand as many swords he wields,
      And takes the thunder on as many shields:
      With strength like his, the Trojan hero stood;
      And soon the fields with falling corps were strow’d,
      When once his falchion found the taste of blood.
      With fury scarce to be conceiv’d, he flew
      Against Niphaeus, whom four coursers drew.
      They, when they see the fiery chief advance,
      And pushing at their chests his pointed lance,
      Wheel’d with so swift a motion, mad with fear,
      They threw their master headlong from the chair.
      They stare, they start, nor stop their course, before
      They bear the bounding chariot to the shore.

      Now Lucagus and Liger scour the plains,
      With two white steeds; but Liger holds the reins,
      And Lucagus the lofty seat maintains:
      Bold brethren both. The former wav’d in air
      His flaming sword: Aeneas couch’d his spear,
      Unus’d to threats, and more unus’d to fear.
      Then Liger thus: “Thy confidence is vain
      To scape from hence, as from the Trojan plain:
      Nor these the steeds which Diomede bestrode,
      Nor this the chariot where Achilles rode;
      Nor Venus’ veil is here, near Neptune’s shield;
      Thy fatal hour is come, and this the field.”
      Thus Liger vainly vaunts: the Trojan peer
      Return’d his answer with his flying spear.
      As Lucagus, to lash his horses, bends,
      Prone to the wheels, and his left foot protends,
      Prepar’d for fight; the fatal dart arrives,
      And thro’ the borders of his buckler drives;
      Pass’d thro’ and pierc’d his groin: the deadly wound,
      Cast from his chariot, roll’d him on the ground.
      Whom thus the chief upbraids with scornful spite:
      “Blame not the slowness of your steeds in flight;
      Vain shadows did not force their swift retreat;
      But you yourself forsake your empty seat.”
      He said, and seiz’d at once the loosen’d rein;
      For Liger lay already on the plain,
      By the same shock: then, stretching out his hands,
      The recreant thus his wretched life demands:
      “Now, by thyself, O more than mortal man!
      By her and him from whom thy breath began,
      Who form’d thee thus divine, I beg thee, spare
      This forfeit life, and hear thy suppliant’s pray’r.”
      Thus much he spoke, and more he would have said;
      But the stern hero turn’d aside his head,
      And cut him short: “I hear another man;
      You talk’d not thus before the fight began.
      Now take your turn; and, as a brother should,
      Attend your brother to the Stygian flood.”
      Then thro’ his breast his fatal sword he sent,
      And the soul issued at the gaping vent.

      As storms the skies, and torrents tear the ground,
      Thus rag’d the prince, and scatter’d deaths around.
      At length Ascanius and the Trojan train
      Broke from the camp, so long besieg’d in vain.

      Meantime the King of Gods and Mortal Man
      Held conference with his queen, and thus began:
      “My sister goddess, and well-pleasing wife,
      Still think you Venus’ aid supports the strife—
      Sustains her Trojans—or themselves, alone,
      With inborn valour force their fortune on?
      How fierce in fight, with courage undecay’d!
      Judge if such warriors want immortal aid.”
      To whom the goddess with the charming eyes,
      Soft in her tone, submissively replies:
      “Why, O my sov’reign lord, whose frown I fear,
      And cannot, unconcern’d, your anger bear;
      Why urge you thus my grief? when, if I still
      (As once I was) were mistress of your will,
      From your almighty pow’r your pleasing wife
      Might gain the grace of length’ning Turnus’ life,
      Securely snatch him from the fatal fight,
      And give him to his aged father’s sight.
      Now let him perish, since you hold it good,
      And glut the Trojans with his pious blood.
      Yet from our lineage he derives his name,
      And, in the fourth degree, from god Pilumnus came;
      Yet he devoutly pays you rites divine,
      And offers daily incense at your shrine.”

      Then shortly thus the sov’reign god replied:
      “Since in my pow’r and goodness you confide,
      If for a little space, a lengthen’d span,
      You beg reprieve for this expiring man,
      I grant you leave to take your Turnus hence
      From instant fate, and can so far dispense.
      But, if some secret meaning lies beneath,
      To save the short-liv’d youth from destin’d death,
      Or if a farther thought you entertain,
      To change the fates; you feed your hopes in vain.”
      To whom the goddess thus, with weeping eyes:
      “And what if that request, your tongue denies,
      Your heart should grant; and not a short reprieve,
      But length of certain life, to Turnus give?
      Now speedy death attends the guiltless youth,
      If my presaging soul divines with truth;
      Which, O! I wish, might err thro’ causeless fears,
      And you (for you have pow’r) prolong his years!”

      Thus having said, involv’d in clouds, she flies,
      And drives a storm before her thro’ the skies.
      Swift she descends, alighting on the plain,
      Where the fierce foes a dubious fight maintain.
      Of air condens’d a spectre soon she made;
      And, what Aeneas was, such seem’d the shade.
      Adorn’d with Dardan arms, the phantom bore
      His head aloft; a plumy crest he wore;
      This hand appear’d a shining sword to wield,
      And that sustain’d an imitated shield.
      With manly mien he stalk’d along the ground,
      Nor wanted voice belied, nor vaunting sound.
      (Thus haunting ghosts appear to waking sight,
      Or dreadful visions in our dreams by night.)
      The spectre seems the Daunian chief to dare,
      And flourishes his empty sword in air.
      At this, advancing, Turnus hurl’d his spear:
      The phantom wheel’d, and seem’d to fly for fear.
      Deluded Turnus thought the Trojan fled,
      And with vain hopes his haughty fancy fed.
      “Whether, O coward?” (thus he calls aloud,
      Nor found he spoke to wind, and chas’d a cloud,)
      “Why thus forsake your bride! Receive from me
      The fated land you sought so long by sea.”
      He said, and, brandishing at once his blade,
      With eager pace pursued the flying shade.
      By chance a ship was fasten’d to the shore,
      Which from old Clusium King Osinius bore:
      The plank was ready laid for safe ascent;
      For shelter there the trembling shadow bent,
      And skipp’t and skulk’d, and under hatches went.
      Exulting Turnus, with regardless haste,
      Ascends the plank, and to the galley pass’d.
      Scarce had he reach’d the prow: Saturnia’s hand
      The haulsers cuts, and shoots the ship from land.
      With wind in poop, the vessel plows the sea,
      And measures back with speed her former way.
      Meantime Aeneas seeks his absent foe,
      And sends his slaughter’d troops to shades below.

      The guileful phantom now forsook the shroud,
      And flew sublime, and vanish’d in a cloud.
      Too late young Turnus the delusion found,
      Far on the sea, still making from the ground.
      Then, thankless for a life redeem’d by shame,
      With sense of honour stung, and forfeit fame,
      Fearful besides of what in fight had pass’d,
      His hands and haggard eyes to heav’n he cast;
      “O Jove!” he cried, “for what offence have I
      Deserv’d to bear this endless infamy?
      Whence am I forc’d, and whether am I borne?
      How, and with what reproach, shall I return?
      Shall ever I behold the Latian plain,
      Or see Laurentum’s lofty tow’rs again?
      What will they say of their deserting chief
      The war was mine: I fly from their relief;
      I led to slaughter, and in slaughter leave;
      And ev’n from hence their dying groans receive.
      Here, overmatch’d in fight, in heaps they lie;
      There, scatter’d o’er the fields, ignobly fly.
      Gape wide, O earth, and draw me down alive!
      Or, O ye pitying winds, a wretch relieve!
      On sands or shelves the splitting vessel drive;
      Or set me shipwreck’d on some desert shore,
      Where no Rutulian eyes may see me more,
      Unknown to friends, or foes, or conscious Fame,
      Lest she should follow, and my flight proclaim.”

      Thus Turnus rav’d, and various fates revolv’d:
      The choice was doubtful, but the death resolv’d.
      And now the sword, and now the sea took place,
      That to revenge, and this to purge disgrace.
      Sometimes he thought to swim the stormy main,
      By stretch of arms the distant shore to gain.
      Thrice he the sword assay’d, and thrice the flood;
      But Juno, mov’d with pity, both withstood.
      And thrice repress’d his rage; strong gales supplied,
      And push’d the vessel o’er the swelling tide.
      At length she lands him on his native shores,
      And to his father’s longing arms restores.

      Meantime, by Jove’s impulse, Mezentius arm’d,
      Succeeding Turnus, with his ardour warm’d
      His fainting friends, reproach’d their shameful flight,
      Repell’d the victors, and renew’d the fight.
      Against their king the Tuscan troops conspire;
      Such is their hate, and such their fierce desire
      Of wish’d revenge: on him, and him alone,
      All hands employ’d, and all their darts are thrown.
      He, like a solid rock by seas inclos’d,
      To raging winds and roaring waves oppos’d,
      From his proud summit looking down, disdains
      Their empty menace, and unmov’d remains.

      Beneath his feet fell haughty Hebrus dead,
      Then Latagus, and Palmus as he fled.
      At Latagus a weighty stone he flung:
      His face was flatted, and his helmet rung.
      But Palmus from behind receives his wound;
      Hamstring’d he falls, and grovels on the ground:
      His crest and armour, from his body torn,
      Thy shoulders, Lausus, and thy head adorn.
      Evas and Mimas, both of Troy, he slew.
      Mimas his birth from fair Theano drew,
      Born on that fatal night, when, big with fire,
      The queen produc’d young Paris to his sire:
      But Paris in the Phrygian fields was slain,
      Unthinking Mimas on the Latian plain.

      And, as a savage boar, on mountains bred,
      With forest mast and fatt’ning marshes fed,
      When once he sees himself in toils inclos’d,
      By huntsmen and their eager hounds oppos’d,
      He whets his tusks, and turns, and dares the war;
      Th’ invaders dart their jav’lins from afar:
      All keep aloof, and safely shout around;
      But none presumes to give a nearer wound:
      He frets and froths, erects his bristled hide,
      And shakes a grove of lances from his side:
      Not otherwise the troops, with hate inspir’d,
      And just revenge against the tyrant fir’d,
      Their darts with clamour at a distance drive,
      And only keep the languish’d war alive.

      From Coritus came Acron to the fight,
      Who left his spouse betroth’d, and unconsummate night.
      Mezentius sees him thro’ the squadrons ride,
      Proud of the purple favours of his bride.
      Then, as a hungry lion, who beholds
      A gamesome goat, who frisks about the folds,
      Or beamy stag, that grazes on the plain—
      He runs, he roars, he shakes his rising mane,
      He grins, and opens wide his greedy jaws;
      The prey lies panting underneath his paws:
      He fills his famish’d maw; his mouth runs o’er
      With unchew’d morsels, while he churns the gore:
      So proud Mezentius rushes on his foes,
      And first unhappy Acron overthrows:
      Stretch’d at his length, he spurns the swarthy ground;
      The lance, besmear’d with blood, lies broken in the wound.
      Then with disdain the haughty victor view’d
      Orodes flying, nor the wretch pursued,
      Nor thought the dastard’s back deserv’d a wound,
      But, running, gain’d th’ advantage of the ground:
      Then turning short, he met him face to face,
      To give his victory the better grace.
      Orodes falls, in equal fight oppress’d:
      Mezentius fix’d his foot upon his breast,
      And rested lance; and thus aloud he cries:
      “Lo! here the champion of my rebels lies!”
      The fields around with Io Paean! ring;
      And peals of shouts applaud the conqu’ring king.
      At this the vanquish’d, with his dying breath,
      Thus faintly spoke, and prophesied in death:
      “Nor thou, proud man, unpunish’d shalt remain:
      Like death attends thee on this fatal plain.”
      Then, sourly smiling, thus the king replied:
      “For what belongs to me, let Jove provide;
      But die thou first, whatever chance ensue.”
      He said, and from the wound the weapon drew.
      A hov’ring mist came swimming o’er his sight,
      And seal’d his eyes in everlasting night.

      By Caedicus, Alcathous was slain;
      Sacrator laid Hydaspes on the plain;
      Orses the strong to greater strength must yield;
      He, with Parthenius, were by Rapo kill’d.
      Then brave Messapus Ericetes slew,
      Who from Lycaon’s blood his lineage drew.
      But from his headstrong horse his fate he found,
      Who threw his master, as he made a bound:
      The chief, alighting, stuck him to the ground;
      Then Clonius, hand to hand, on foot assails:
      The Trojan sinks, and Neptune’s son prevails.
      Agis the Lycian, stepping forth with pride,
      To single fight the boldest foe defied;
      Whom Tuscan Valerus by force o’ercame,
      And not belied his mighty father’s fame.
      Salius to death the great Antronius sent:
      But the same fate the victor underwent,
      Slain by Nealces’ hand, well-skill’d to throw
      The flying dart, and draw the far-deceiving bow.

      Thus equal deaths are dealt with equal chance;
      By turns they quit their ground, by turns advance:
      Victors and vanquish’d, in the various field,
      Nor wholly overcome, nor wholly yield.
      The gods from heav’n survey the fatal strife,
      And mourn the miseries of human life.
      Above the rest, two goddesses appear
      Concern’d for each: here Venus, Juno there.
      Amidst the crowd, infernal Ate shakes
      Her scourge aloft, and crest of hissing snakes.

      Once more the proud Mezentius, with disdain,
      Brandish’d his spear, and rush’d into the plain,
      Where tow’ring in the midmost rank he stood,
      Like tall Orion stalking o’er the flood.
      (When with his brawny breast he cuts the waves,
      His shoulders scarce the topmost billow laves),
      Or like a mountain ash, whose roots are spread,
      Deep fix’d in earth; in clouds he hides his head.

      The Trojan prince beheld him from afar,
      And dauntless undertook the doubtful war.
      Collected in his strength, and like a rock,
      Pois’d on his base, Mezentius stood the shock.
      He stood, and, measuring first with careful eyes
      The space his spear could reach, aloud he cries:
      “My strong right hand, and sword, assist my stroke!
      (Those only gods Mezentius will invoke.)
      His armour, from the Trojan pirate torn,
      By my triumphant Lausus shall be worn.”
      He said; and with his utmost force he threw
      The massy spear, which, hissing as it flew,
      Reach’d the celestial shield, that stopp’d the course;
      But, glancing thence, the yet unbroken force
      Took a new bent obliquely, and betwixt
      The side and bowels fam’d Anthores fix’d.
      Anthores had from Argos travel’d far,
      Alcides’ friend, and brother of the war;
      Till, tir’d with toils, fair Italy he chose,
      And in Evander’s palace sought repose.
      Now, falling by another’s wound, his eyes
      He cast to heav’n, on Argos thinks, and dies.

      The pious Trojan then his jav’lin sent;
      The shield gave way; thro’ treble plates it went
      Of solid brass, of linen trebly roll’d,
      And three bull hides which round the buckler fold.
      All these it pass’d, resistless in the course,
      Transpierc’d his thigh, and spent its dying force.
      The gaping wound gush’d out a crimson flood.
      The Trojan, glad with sight of hostile blood,
      His falchion drew, to closer fight address’d,
      And with new force his fainting foe oppress’d.

      His father’s peril Lausus view’d with grief;
      He sigh’d, he wept, he ran to his relief.
      And here, heroic youth, ’tis here I must
      To thy immortal memory be just,
      And sing an act so noble and so new,
      Posterity will scarce believe ’tis true.
      Pain’d with his wound, and useless for the fight,
      The father sought to save himself by flight:
      Encumber’d, slow he dragg’d the spear along,
      Which pierc’d his thigh, and in his buckler hung.
      The pious youth, resolv’d on death, below
      The lifted sword springs forth to face the foe;
      Protects his parent, and prevents the blow.
      Shouts of applause ran ringing thro’ the field,
      To see the son the vanquish’d father shield.
      All, fir’d with gen’rous indignation, strive,
      And with a storm of darts to distance drive
      The Trojan chief, who, held at bay from far,
      On his Vulcanian orb sustain’d the war.

      As, when thick hail comes rattling in the wind,
      The plowman, passenger, and lab’ring hind
      For shelter to the neighb’ring covert fly,
      Or hous’d, or safe in hollow caverns lie;
      But, that o’erblown, when heav’n above ’em smiles,
      Return to travel, and renew their toils:
      Aeneas thus, o’erwhelmed on ev’ry side,
      The storm of darts, undaunted, did abide;
      And thus to Lausus loud with friendly threat’ning cried:
      “Why wilt thou rush to certain death, and rage
      In rash attempts, beyond thy tender age,
      Betray’d by pious love?” Nor, thus forborne,
      The youth desists, but with insulting scorn
      Provokes the ling’ring prince, whose patience, tir’d,
      Gave place; and all his breast with fury fir’d.
      For now the Fates prepar’d their sharpen’d shears;
      And lifted high the flaming sword appears,
      Which, full descending with a frightful sway,
      Thro’ shield and corslet forc’d th’ impetuous way,
      And buried deep in his fair bosom lay.
      The purple streams thro’ the thin armour strove,
      And drench’d th’ imbroider’d coat his mother wove;
      And life at length forsook his heaving heart,
      Loth from so sweet a mansion to depart.

      But when, with blood and paleness all o’erspread,
      The pious prince beheld young Lausus dead,
      He griev’d; he wept; the sight an image brought
      Of his own filial love, a sadly pleasing thought:
      Then stretch’d his hand to hold him up, and said:
      “Poor hapless youth! what praises can be paid
      To love so great, to such transcendent store
      Of early worth, and sure presage of more?
      Accept whate’er Aeneas can afford;
      Untouch’d thy arms, untaken be thy sword;
      And all that pleas’d thee living, still remain
      Inviolate, and sacred to the slain.
      Thy body on thy parents I bestow,
      To rest thy soul, at least, if shadows know,
      Or have a sense of human things below.
      There to thy fellow ghosts with glory tell:
      ‘’Twas by the great Aeneas hand I fell.’”
      With this, his distant friends he beckons near,
      Provokes their duty, and prevents their fear:
      Himself assists to lift him from the ground,
      With clotted locks, and blood that well’d from out the wound.

      Meantime, his father, now no father, stood,
      And wash’d his wounds by Tiber’s yellow flood:
      Oppress’d with anguish, panting, and o’erspent,
      His fainting limbs against an oak he leant.
      A bough his brazen helmet did sustain;
      His heavier arms lay scatter’d on the plain:
      A chosen train of youth around him stand;
      His drooping head was rested on his hand:
      His grisly beard his pensive bosom sought;
      And all on Lausus ran his restless thought.
      Careful, concern’d his danger to prevent,
      He much enquir’d, and many a message sent
      To warn him from the field—alas! in vain!
      Behold, his mournful followers bear him slain!
      O’er his broad shield still gush’d the yawning wound,
      And drew a bloody trail along the ground.
      Far off he heard their cries, far off divin’d
      The dire event, with a foreboding mind.
      With dust he sprinkled first his hoary head;
      Then both his lifted hands to heav’n he spread;
      Last, the dear corpse embracing, thus he said:
      “What joys, alas! could this frail being give,
      That I have been so covetous to live?
      To see my son, and such a son, resign
      His life, a ransom for preserving mine!
      And am I then preserv’d, and art thou lost?
      How much too dear has that redemption cost!
      ’Tis now my bitter banishment I feel:
      This is a wound too deep for time to heal.
      My guilt thy growing virtues did defame;
      My blackness blotted thy unblemish’d name.
      Chas’d from a throne, abandon’d, and exil’d
      For foul misdeeds, were punishments too mild:
      I ow’d my people these, and, from their hate,
      With less resentment could have borne my fate.
      And yet I live, and yet sustain the sight
      Of hated men, and of more hated light:
      But will not long.” With that he rais’d from ground
      His fainting limbs, that stagger’d with his wound;
      Yet, with a mind resolv’d, and unappall’d
      With pains or perils, for his courser call’d
      Well-mouth’d, well-manag’d, whom himself did dress
      With daily care, and mounted with success;
      His aid in arms, his ornament in peace.

      Soothing his courage with a gentle stroke,
      The steed seem’d sensible, while thus he spoke:
      “O Rhoebus, we have liv’d too long for me—
      If life and long were terms that could agree!
      This day thou either shalt bring back the head
      And bloody trophies of the Trojan dead;
      This day thou either shalt revenge my woe,
      For murder’d Lausus, on his cruel foe;
      Or, if inexorable fate deny
      Our conquest, with thy conquer’d master die:
      For, after such a lord, I rest secure,
      Thou wilt no foreign reins, or Trojan load endure.”
      He said; and straight th’ officious courser kneels,
      To take his wonted weight. His hands he fills
      With pointed jav’lins; on his head he lac’d
      His glitt’ring helm, which terribly was grac’d
      With waving horsehair, nodding from afar;
      Then spurr’d his thund’ring steed amidst the war.
      Love, anguish, wrath, and grief, to madness wrought,
      Despair, and secret shame, and conscious thought
      Of inborn worth, his lab’ring soul oppress’d,
      Roll’d in his eyes, and rag’d within his breast.
      Then loud he call’d Aeneas thrice by name:
      The loud repeated voice to glad Aeneas came.
      “Great Jove,” he said, “and the far-shooting god,
      Inspire thy mind to make thy challenge good!”
      He spoke no more; but hasten’d, void of fear,
      And threaten’d with his long protended spear.

      To whom Mezentius thus: “Thy vaunts are vain.
      My Lausus lies extended on the plain:
      He’s lost! thy conquest is already won;
      The wretched sire is murder’d in the son.
      Nor fate I fear, but all the gods defy.
      Forbear thy threats: my bus’ness is to die;
      But first receive this parting legacy.”
      He said; and straight a whirling dart he sent;
      Another after, and another went.
      Round in a spacious ring he rides the field,
      And vainly plies th’ impenetrable shield.
      Thrice rode he round; and thrice Aeneas wheel’d,
      Turn’d as he turn’d: the golden orb withstood
      The strokes, and bore about an iron wood.
      Impatient of delay, and weary grown,
      Still to defend, and to defend alone,
      To wrench the darts which in his buckler light,
      Urg’d and o’er-labour’d in unequal fight;
      At length resolv’d, he throws with all his force
      Full at the temples of the warrior horse.
      Just where the stroke was aim’d, th’ unerring spear
      Made way, and stood transfix’d thro’ either ear.
      Seiz’d with unwonted pain, surpris’d with fright,
      The wounded steed curvets, and, rais’d upright,
      Lights on his feet before; his hoofs behind
      Spring up in air aloft, and lash the wind.
      Down comes the rider headlong from his height:
      His horse came after with unwieldy weight,
      And, flound’ring forward, pitching on his head,
      His lord’s encumber’d shoulder overlaid.

      From either host, the mingled shouts and cries
      Of Trojans and Rutulians rend the skies.
      Aeneas, hast’ning, wav’d his fatal sword
      High o’er his head, with this reproachful word:
      “Now; where are now thy vaunts, the fierce disdain
      Of proud Mezentius, and the lofty strain?”

      Struggling, and wildly staring on the skies,
      With scarce recover’d sight he thus replies:
      “Why these insulting words, this waste of breath,
      To souls undaunted, and secure of death?
      ’Tis no dishonour for the brave to die,
      Nor came I here with hope of victory;
      Nor ask I life, nor fought with that design:
      As I had us’d my fortune, use thou thine.
      My dying son contracted no such band;
      The gift is hateful from his murd’rer’s hand.
      For this, this only favour let me sue,
      If pity can to conquer’d foes be due:
      Refuse it not; but let my body have
      The last retreat of humankind, a grave.
      Too well I know th’ insulting people’s hate;
      Protect me from their vengeance after fate:
      This refuge for my poor remains provide,
      And lay my much-lov’d Lausus by my side.”
      He said, and to the sword his throat applied.
      The crimson stream distain’d his arms around,
      And the disdainful soul came rushing thro’ the wound.




      Scarce had the rosy Morning rais’d her head
      Above the waves, and left her wat’ry bed;
      The pious chief, whom double cares attend
      For his unburied soldiers and his friend,
      Yet first to Heav’n perform’d a victor’s vows:
      He bar’d an ancient oak of all her boughs;
      Then on a rising ground the trunk he plac’d,
      Which with the spoils of his dead foe he grac’d.
      The coat of arms by proud Mezentius worn,
      Now on a naked snag in triumph borne,
      Was hung on high, and glitter’d from afar,
      A trophy sacred to the God of War.
      Above his arms, fix’d on the leafless wood,
      Appear’d his plumy crest, besmear’d with blood:
      His brazen buckler on the left was seen;
      Truncheons of shiver’d lances hung between;
      And on the right was placed his corslet, bor’d;
      And to the neck was tied his unavailing sword.

      A crowd of chiefs inclose the godlike man,
      Who thus, conspicuous in the midst, began:
      “Our toils, my friends, are crown’d with sure success;
      The greater part perform’d, achieve the less.
      Now follow cheerful to the trembling town;
      Press but an entrance, and presume it won.
      Fear is no more, for fierce Mezentius lies,
      As the first fruits of war, a sacrifice.
      Turnus shall fall extended on the plain,
      And, in this omen, is already slain.
      Prepar’d in arms, pursue your happy chance;
      That none unwarn’d may plead his ignorance,
      And I, at Heav’n’s appointed hour, may find
      Your warlike ensigns waving in the wind.
      Meantime the rites and fun’ral pomps prepare,
      Due to your dead companions of the war:
      The last respect the living can bestow,
      To shield their shadows from contempt below.
      That conquer’d earth be theirs, for which they fought,
      And which for us with their own blood they bought;
      But first the corpse of our unhappy friend
      To the sad city of Evander send,
      Who, not inglorious, in his age’s bloom,
      Was hurried hence by too severe a doom.”

      Thus, weeping while he spoke, he took his way,
      Where, new in death, lamented Pallas lay.
      Acoetes watch’d the corpse; whose youth deserv’d
      The father’s trust; and now the son he serv’d
      With equal faith, but less auspicious care.
      Th’ attendants of the slain his sorrow share.
      A troop of Trojans mix’d with these appear,
      And mourning matrons with dishevel’d hair.
      Soon as the prince appears, they raise a cry;
      All beat their breasts, and echoes rend the sky.
      They rear his drooping forehead from the ground;
      But, when Aeneas view’d the grisly wound
      Which Pallas in his manly bosom bore,
      And the fair flesh distain’d with purple gore;
      First, melting into tears, the pious man
      Deplor’d so sad a sight, then thus began:
      “Unhappy youth! when Fortune gave the rest
      Of my full wishes, she refus’d the best!
      She came; but brought not thee along, to bless
      My longing eyes, and share in my success:
      She grudg’d thy safe return, the triumphs due
      To prosp’rous valour, in the public view.
      Not thus I promis’d, when thy father lent
      Thy needless succour with a sad consent;
      Embrac’d me, parting for th’ Etrurian land,
      And sent me to possess a large command.
      He warn’d, and from his own experience told,
      Our foes were warlike, disciplin’d, and bold.
      And now perhaps, in hopes of thy return,
      Rich odors on his loaded altars burn,
      While we, with vain officious pomp, prepare
      To send him back his portion of the war,
      A bloody breathless body, which can owe
      No farther debt, but to the pow’rs below.
      The wretched father, ere his race is run,
      Shall view the fun’ral honours of his son.
      These are my triumphs of the Latian war,
      Fruits of my plighted faith and boasted care!
      And yet, unhappy sire, thou shalt not see
      A son whose death disgrac’d his ancestry;
      Thou shalt not blush, old man, however griev’d:
      Thy Pallas no dishonest wound receiv’d.
      He died no death to make thee wish, too late,
      Thou hadst not liv’d to see his shameful fate:
      But what a champion has th’ Ausonian coast,
      And what a friend hast thou, Ascanius, lost!”

      Thus having mourn’d, he gave the word around,
      To raise the breathless body from the ground;
      And chose a thousand horse, the flow’r of all
      His warlike troops, to wait the funeral,
      To bear him back and share Evander’s grief:
      A well-becoming, but a weak relief.
      Of oaken twigs they twist an easy bier,
      Then on their shoulders the sad burden rear.
      The body on this rural hearse is borne:
      Strew’d leaves and funeral greens the bier adorn.
      All pale he lies, and looks a lovely flow’r,
      New cropp’d by virgin hands, to dress the bow’r:
      Unfaded yet, but yet unfed below,
      No more to mother earth or the green stern shall owe.
      Then two fair vests, of wondrous work and cost,
      Of purple woven, and with gold emboss’d,
      For ornament the Trojan hero brought,
      Which with her hands Sidonian Dido wrought.
      One vest array’d the corpse; and one they spread
      O’er his clos’d eyes, and wrapp’d around his head,
      That, when the yellow hair in flame should fall,
      The catching fire might burn the golden caul.
      Besides, the spoils of foes in battle slain,
      When he descended on the Latian plain;
      Arms, trappings, horses, by the hearse are led
      In long array—th’ achievements of the dead.
      Then, pinion’d with their hands behind, appear
      Th’ unhappy captives, marching in the rear,
      Appointed off’rings in the victor’s name,
      To sprinkle with their blood the fun’ral flame.
      Inferior trophies by the chiefs are borne;
      Gauntlets and helms their loaded hands adorn;
      And fair inscriptions fix’d, and titles read
      Of Latian leaders conquer’d by the dead.

      Acoetes on his pupil’s corpse attends,
      With feeble steps, supported by his friends.
      Pausing at ev’ry pace, in sorrow drown’d,
      Betwixt their arms he sinks upon the ground;
      Where grov’ling while he lies in deep despair,
      He beats his breast, and rends his hoary hair.
      The champion’s chariot next is seen to roll,
      Besmear’d with hostile blood, and honourably foul.
      To close the pomp, Aethon, the steed of state,
      Is led, the fun’rals of his lord to wait.
      Stripp’d of his trappings, with a sullen pace
      He walks; and the big tears run rolling down his face.
      The lance of Pallas, and the crimson crest,
      Are borne behind: the victor seiz’d the rest.
      The march begins: the trumpets hoarsely sound;
      The pikes and lances trail along the ground.
      Thus while the Trojan and Arcadian horse
      To Pallantean tow’rs direct their course,
      In long procession rank’d, the pious chief
      Stopp’d in the rear, and gave a vent to grief:
      “The public care,” he said, “which war attends,
      Diverts our present woes, at least suspends.
      Peace with the manes of great Pallas dwell!
      Hail, holy relics! and a last farewell!”
      He said no more, but, inly thro’ he mourn’d,
      Restrained his tears, and to the camp return’d.

      Now suppliants, from Laurentum sent, demand
      A truce, with olive branches in their hand;
      Obtest his clemency, and from the plain
      Beg leave to draw the bodies of their slain.
      They plead, that none those common rites deny
      To conquer’d foes that in fair battle die.
      All cause of hate was ended in their death;
      Nor could he war with bodies void of breath.
      A king, they hop’d, would hear a king’s request,
      Whose son he once was call’d, and once his guest.

      Their suit, which was too just to be denied,
      The hero grants, and farther thus replied:
      “O Latian princes, how severe a fate
      In causeless quarrels has involv’d your state,
      And arm’d against an unoffending man,
      Who sought your friendship ere the war began!
      You beg a truce, which I would gladly give,
      Not only for the slain, but those who live.
      I came not hither but by Heav’n’s command,
      And sent by fate to share the Latian land.
      Nor wage I wars unjust: your king denied
      My proffer’d friendship, and my promis’d bride;
      Left me for Turnus. Turnus then should try
      His cause in arms, to conquer or to die.
      My right and his are in dispute: the slain
      Fell without fault, our quarrel to maintain.
      In equal arms let us alone contend;
      And let him vanquish, whom his fates befriend.
      This is the way (so tell him) to possess
      The royal virgin, and restore the peace.
      Bear this message back, with ample leave,
      That your slain friends may fun’ral rites receive.”

      Thus having said—th’ embassadors, amaz’d,
      Stood mute a while, and on each other gaz’d.
      Drances, their chief, who harbour’d in his breast
      Long hate to Turnus, as his foe profess’d,
      Broke silence first, and to the godlike man,
      With graceful action bowing, thus began:
      “Auspicious prince, in arms a mighty name,
      But yet whose actions far transcend your fame;
      Would I your justice or your force express,
      Thought can but equal; and all words are less.
      Your answer we shall thankfully relate,
      And favours granted to the Latian state.
      If wish’d success our labour shall attend,
      Think peace concluded, and the king your friend:
      Let Turnus leave the realm to your command,
      And seek alliance in some other land:
      Build you the city which your fates assign;
      We shall be proud in the great work to join.”

      Thus Drances; and his words so well persuade
      The rest impower’d, that soon a truce is made.
      Twelve days the term allow’d: and, during those,
      Latians and Trojans, now no longer foes,
      Mix’d in the woods, for fun’ral piles prepare
      To fell the timber, and forget the war.
      Loud axes thro’ the groaning groves resound;
      Oak, mountain ash, and poplar spread the ground;
      First fall from high; and some the trunks receive
      In loaden wains; with wedges some they cleave.

      And now the fatal news by Fame is blown
      Thro’ the short circuit of th’ Arcadian town,
      Of Pallas slain—by Fame, which just before
      His triumphs on distended pinions bore.
      Rushing from out the gate, the people stand,
      Each with a fun’ral flambeau in his hand.
      Wildly they stare, distracted with amaze:
      The fields are lighten’d with a fiery blaze,
      That cast a sullen splendour on their friends,
      The marching troop which their dead prince attends.
      Both parties meet: they raise a doleful cry;
      The matrons from the walls with shrieks reply,
      And their mix’d mourning rends the vaulted sky.
      The town is fill’d with tumult and with tears,
      Till the loud clamours reach Evander’s ears:
      Forgetful of his state, he runs along,
      With a disorder’d pace, and cleaves the throng;
      Falls on the corpse; and groaning there he lies,
      With silent grief, that speaks but at his eyes.
      Short sighs and sobs succeed; till sorrow breaks
      A passage, and at once he weeps and speaks:

      “O Pallas! thou hast fail’d thy plighted word,
      To fight with caution, not to tempt the sword!
      I warn’d thee, but in vain; for well I knew
      What perils youthful ardour would pursue,
      That boiling blood would carry thee too far,
      Young as thou wert in dangers, raw to war!
      O curst essay of arms, disastrous doom,
      Prelude of bloody fields, and fights to come!
      Hard elements of unauspicious war,
      Vain vows to Heav’n, and unavailing care!
      Thrice happy thou, dear partner of my bed,
      Whose holy soul the stroke of Fortune fled,
      Prescious of ills, and leaving me behind,
      To drink the dregs of life by fate assign’d!
      Beyond the goal of nature I have gone:
      My Pallas late set out, but reach’d too soon.
      If, for my league against th’ Ausonian state,
      Amidst their weapons I had found my fate,
      (Deserv’d from them,) then I had been return’d
      A breathless victor, and my son had mourn’d.
      Yet will I not my Trojan friend upbraid,
      Nor grudge th’ alliance I so gladly made.
      ’Twas not his fault, my Pallas fell so young,
      But my own crime, for having liv’d too long.
      Yet, since the gods had destin’d him to die,
      At least he led the way to victory:
      First for his friends he won the fatal shore,
      And sent whole herds of slaughter’d foes before;
      A death too great, too glorious to deplore.
      Nor will I add new honours to thy grave,
      Content with those the Trojan hero gave:
      That funeral pomp thy Phrygian friends design’d,
      In which the Tuscan chiefs and army join’d.
      Great spoils and trophies, gain’d by thee, they bear:
      Then let thy own achievements be thy share.
      Even thou, O Turnus, hadst a trophy stood,
      Whose mighty trunk had better grac’d the wood,
      If Pallas had arriv’d, with equal length
      Of years, to match thy bulk with equal strength.
      But why, unhappy man, dost thou detain
      These troops, to view the tears thou shedd’st in vain?
      Go, friends, this message to your lord relate:
      Tell him, that, if I bear my bitter fate,
      And, after Pallas’ death, live ling’ring on,
      ’Tis to behold his vengeance for my son.
      I stay for Turnus, whose devoted head
      Is owing to the living and the dead.
      My son and I expect it from his hand;
      ’Tis all that he can give, or we demand.
      Joy is no more; but I would gladly go,
      To greet my Pallas with such news below.”

      The morn had now dispell’d the shades of night,
      Restoring toils, when she restor’d the light.
      The Trojan king and Tuscan chief command
      To raise the piles along the winding strand.
      Their friends convey the dead fun’ral fires;
      Black smould’ring smoke from the green wood expires;
      The light of heav’n is chok’d, and the new day retires.
      Then thrice around the kindled piles they go
      (For ancient custom had ordain’d it so)
      Thrice horse and foot about the fires are led;
      And thrice, with loud laments, they hail the dead.
      Tears, trickling down their breasts, bedew the ground,
      And drums and trumpets mix their mournful sound.
      Amid the blaze, their pious brethren throw
      The spoils, in battle taken from the foe:
      Helms, bits emboss’d, and swords of shining steel;
      One casts a target, one a chariot wheel;
      Some to their fellows their own arms restore:
      The falchions which in luckless fight they bore,
      Their bucklers pierc’d, their darts bestow’d in vain,
      And shiver’d lances gather’d from the plain.
      Whole herds of offer’d bulls, about the fire,
      And bristled boars, and woolly sheep expire.
      Around the piles a careful troop attends,
      To watch the wasting flames, and weep their burning friends;
      Ling’ring along the shore, till dewy night
      New decks the face of heav’n with starry light.

      The conquer’d Latians, with like pious care,
      Piles without number for their dead prepare.
      Part in the places where they fell are laid;
      And part are to the neighb’ring fields convey’d.
      The corps of kings, and captains of renown,
      Borne off in state, are buried in the town;
      The rest, unhonour’d, and without a name,
      Are cast a common heap to feed the flame.
      Trojans and Latians vie with like desires
      To make the field of battle shine with fires,
      And the promiscuous blaze to heav’n aspires.

      Now had the morning thrice renew’d the light,
      And thrice dispell’d the shadows of the night,
      When those who round the wasted fires remain,
      Perform the last sad office to the slain.
      They rake the yet warm ashes from below;
      These, and the bones unburn’d, in earth bestow;
      These relics with their country rites they grace,
      And raise a mount of turf to mark the place.

      But, in the palace of the king, appears
      A scene more solemn, and a pomp of tears.
      Maids, matrons, widows, mix their common moans;
      Orphans their sires, and sires lament their sons.
      All in that universal sorrow share,
      And curse the cause of this unhappy war:
      A broken league, a bride unjustly sought,
      A crown usurp’d, which with their blood is bought!
      These are the crimes with which they load the name
      Of Turnus, and on him alone exclaim:
      “Let him who lords it o’er th’ Ausonian land
      Engage the Trojan hero hand to hand:
      His is the gain; our lot is but to serve;
      ’Tis just, the sway he seeks, he should deserve.”
      This Drances aggravates; and adds, with spite:
      “His foe expects, and dares him to the fight.”
      Nor Turnus wants a party, to support
      His cause and credit in the Latian court.
      His former acts secure his present fame,
      And the queen shades him with her mighty name.

      While thus their factious minds with fury burn,
      The legates from th’ Aetolian prince return:
      Sad news they bring, that, after all the cost
      And care employ’d, their embassy is lost;
      That Diomedes refus’d his aid in war,
      Unmov’d with presents, and as deaf to pray’r.
      Some new alliance must elsewhere be sought,
      Or peace with Troy on hard conditions bought.

      Latinus, sunk in sorrow, finds too late,
      A foreign son is pointed out by fate;
      And, till Aeneas shall Lavinia wed,
      The wrath of Heav’n is hov’ring o’er his head.
      The gods, he saw, espous’d the juster side,
      When late their titles in the field were tried:
      Witness the fresh laments, and fun’ral tears undried.
      Thus, full of anxious thought, he summons all
      The Latian senate to the council hall.
      The princes come, commanded by their head,
      And crowd the paths that to the palace lead.
      Supreme in pow’r, and reverenc’d for his years,
      He takes the throne, and in the midst appears.
      Majestically sad, he sits in state,
      And bids his envoys their success relate.

      When Venulus began, the murmuring sound
      Was hush’d, and sacred silence reign’d around.
      “We have,” said he, “perform’d your high command,
      And pass’d with peril a long tract of land:
      We reach’d the place desir’d; with wonder fill’d,
      The Grecian tents and rising tow’rs beheld.
      Great Diomede has compass’d round with walls
      The city, which Argyripa he calls,
      From his own Argos nam’d. We touch’d, with joy,
      The royal hand that raz’d unhappy Troy.
      When introduc’d, our presents first we bring,
      Then crave an instant audience from the king.
      His leave obtain’d, our native soil we name,
      And tell th’ important cause for which we came.
      Attentively he heard us, while we spoke;
      Then, with soft accents, and a pleasing look,
      Made this return: ‘Ausonian race, of old
      Renown’d for peace, and for an age of gold,
      What madness has your alter’d minds possess’d,
      To change for war hereditary rest,
      Solicit arms unknown, and tempt the sword,
      A needless ill your ancestors abhorr’d?
      We—for myself I speak, and all the name
      Of Grecians, who to Troy’s destruction came,
      (Omitting those who were in battle slain,
      Or borne by rolling Simois to the main)
      Not one but suffer’d, and too dearly bought
      The prize of honour which in arms he sought;
      Some doom’d to death, and some in exile driv’n.
      Outcasts, abandon’d by the care of Heav’n;
      So worn, so wretched, so despis’d a crew,
      As ev’n old Priam might with pity view.
      Witness the vessels by Minerva toss’d
      In storms; the vengeful Capharean coast;
      Th’ Euboean rocks! the prince, whose brother led
      Our armies to revenge his injur’d bed,
      In Egypt lost! Ulysses with his men
      Have seen Charybdis and the Cyclops’ den.
      Why should I name Idomeneus, in vain
      Restor’d to scepters, and expell’d again?
      Or young Achilles, by his rival slain?
      Ev’n he, the King of Men, the foremost name
      Of all the Greeks, and most renown’d by fame,
      The proud revenger of another’s wife,
      Yet by his own adult’ress lost his life;
      Fell at his threshold; and the spoils of Troy
      The foul polluters of his bed enjoy.
      The gods have envied me the sweets of life,
      My much lov’d country, and my more lov’d wife:
      Banish’d from both, I mourn; while in the sky,
      Transform’d to birds, my lost companions fly:
      Hov’ring about the coasts, they make their moan,
      And cuff the cliffs with pinions not their own.
      What squalid spectres, in the dead of night,
      Break my short sleep, and skim before my sight!
      I might have promis’d to myself those harms,
      Mad as I was, when I, with mortal arms,
      Presum’d against immortal pow’rs to move,
      And violate with wounds the Queen of Love.
      Such arms this hand shall never more employ;
      No hate remains with me to ruin’d Troy.
      I war not with its dust; nor am I glad
      To think of past events, or good or bad.
      Your presents I return: whate’er you bring
      To buy my friendship, send the Trojan king.
      We met in fight; I know him, to my cost:
      With what a whirling force his lance he toss’d!
      Heav’ns! what a spring was in his arm, to throw!
      How high he held his shield, and rose at ev’ry blow!
      Had Troy produc’d two more his match in might,
      They would have chang’d the fortune of the fight:
      Th’ invasion of the Greeks had been return’d,
      Our empire wasted, and our cities burn’d.
      The long defence the Trojan people made,
      The war protracted, and the siege delay’d,
      Were due to Hector’s and this hero’s hand:
      Both brave alike, and equal in command;
      Aeneas, not inferior in the field,
      In pious reverence to the gods excell’d.
      Make peace, ye Latians, and avoid with care
      Th’ impending dangers of a fatal war.’
      He said no more; but, with this cold excuse,
      Refus’d th’ alliance, and advis’d a truce.”

      Thus Venulus concluded his report.
      A jarring murmur fill’d the factious court:
      As, when a torrent rolls with rapid force,
      And dashes o’er the stones that stop the course,
      The flood, constrain’d within a scanty space,
      Roars horrible along th’ uneasy race;
      White foam in gath’ring eddies floats around;
      The rocky shores rebellow to the sound.

      The murmur ceas’d: then from his lofty throne
      The king invok’d the gods, and thus begun:
      “I wish, ye Latins, what we now debate
      Had been resolv’d before it was too late.
      Much better had it been for you and me,
      Unforc’d by this our last necessity,
      To have been earlier wise, than now to call
      A council, when the foe surrounds the wall.
      O citizens, we wage unequal war,
      With men not only Heav’n’s peculiar care,
      But Heav’n’s own race; unconquer’d in the field,
      Or, conquer’d, yet unknowing how to yield.
      What hopes you had in Diomedes, lay down:
      Our hopes must centre on ourselves alone.
      Yet those how feeble, and, indeed, how vain,
      You see too well; nor need my words explain.
      Vanquish’d without resource; laid flat by fate;
      Factions within, a foe without the gate!
      Not but I grant that all perform’d their parts
      With manly force, and with undaunted hearts:
      With our united strength the war we wag’d;
      With equal numbers, equal arms, engag’d.
      You see th’ event.—Now hear what I propose,
      To save our friends, and satisfy our foes.
      A tract of land the Latins have possess’d
      Along the Tiber, stretching to the west,
      Which now Rutulians and Auruncans till,
      And their mix’d cattle graze the fruitful hill.
      Those mountains fill’d with firs, that lower land,
      If you consent, the Trojan shall command,
      Call’d into part of what is ours; and there,
      On terms agreed, the common country share.
      There let them build and settle, if they please;
      Unless they choose once more to cross the seas,
      In search of seats remote from Italy,
      And from unwelcome inmates set us free.
      Then twice ten galleys let us build with speed,
      Or twice as many more, if more they need.
      Materials are at hand; a well-grown wood
      Runs equal with the margin of the flood:
      Let them the number and the form assign;
      The care and cost of all the stores be mine.
      To treat the peace, a hundred senators
      Shall be commission’d hence with ample pow’rs,
      With olive the presents they shall bear,
      A purple robe, a royal iv’ry chair,
      And all the marks of sway that Latian monarchs wear,
      And sums of gold. Among yourselves debate
      This great affair, and save the sinking state.”

      Then Drances took the word, who grudg’d, long since,
      The rising glories of the Daunian prince.
      Factious and rich, bold at the council board,
      But cautious in the field, he shunn’d the sword;
      A close caballer, and tongue-valiant lord.
      Noble his mother was, and near the throne;
      But, what his father’s parentage, unknown.
      He rose, and took th’ advantage of the times,
      To load young Turnus with invidious crimes.
      “Such truths, O king,” said he, “your words contain,
      As strike the sense, and all replies are vain;
      Nor are your loyal subjects now to seek
      What common needs require, but fear to speak.
      Let him give leave of speech, that haughty man,
      Whose pride this unauspicious war began;
      For whose ambition (let me dare to say,
      Fear set apart, tho’ death is in my way)
      The plains of Latium run with blood around.
      So many valiant heroes bite the ground;
      Dejected grief in ev’ry face appears;
      A town in mourning, and a land in tears;
      While he, th’ undoubted author of our harms,
      The man who menaces the gods with arms,
      Yet, after all his boasts, forsook the fight,
      And sought his safety in ignoble flight.
      Now, best of kings, since you propose to send
      Such bounteous presents to your Trojan friend;
      Add yet a greater at our joint request,
      One which he values more than all the rest:
      Give him the fair Lavinia for his bride;
      With that alliance let the league be tied,
      And for the bleeding land a lasting peace provide.
      Let insolence no longer awe the throne;
      But, with a father’s right, bestow your own.
      For this maligner of the general good,
      If still we fear his force, he must be woo’d;
      His haughty godhead we with pray’rs implore,
      Your scepter to release, and our just rights restore.
      O cursed cause of all our ills, must we
      Wage wars unjust, and fall in fight, for thee!
      What right hast thou to rule the Latian state,
      And send us out to meet our certain fate?
      ’Tis a destructive war: from Turnus’ hand
      Our peace and public safety we demand.
      Let the fair bride to the brave chief remain;
      If not, the peace, without the pledge, is vain.
      Turnus, I know you think me not your friend,
      Nor will I much with your belief contend:
      I beg your greatness not to give the law
      In others’ realms, but, beaten, to withdraw.
      Pity your own, or pity our estate;
      Nor twist our fortunes with your sinking fate.
      Your interest is, the war should never cease;
      But we have felt enough to wish the peace:
      A land exhausted to the last remains,
      Depopulated towns, and driven plains.
      Yet, if desire of fame, and thirst of pow’r,
      A beauteous princess, with a crown in dow’r,
      So fire your mind, in arms assert your right,
      And meet your foe, who dares you to the fight.
      Mankind, it seems, is made for you alone;
      We, but the slaves who mount you to the throne:
      A base ignoble crowd, without a name,
      Unwept, unworthy, of the fun’ral flame,
      By duty bound to forfeit each his life,
      That Turnus may possess a royal wife.
      Permit not, mighty man, so mean a crew
      Should share such triumphs, and detain from you
      The post of honour, your undoubted due.
      Rather alone your matchless force employ,
      To merit what alone you must enjoy.”

      These words, so full of malice mix’d with art,
      Inflam’d with rage the youthful hero’s heart.
      Then, groaning from the bottom of his breast,
      He heav’d for wind, and thus his wrath express’d:
      “You, Drances, never want a stream of words,
      Then, when the public need requires our swords.
      First in the council hall to steer the state,
      And ever foremost in a tongue-debate,
      While our strong walls secure us from the foe,
      Ere yet with blood our ditches overflow:
      But let the potent orator declaim,
      And with the brand of coward blot my name;
      Free leave is giv’n him, when his fatal hand
      Has cover’d with more corps the sanguine strand,
      And high as mine his tow’ring trophies stand.
      If any doubt remains, who dares the most,
      Let us decide it at the Trojan’s cost,
      And issue both abreast, where honour calls—
      (Foes are not far to seek without the walls)
      Unless his noisy tongue can only fight,
      And feet were giv’n him but to speed his flight.
      I beaten from the field? I forc’d away?
      Who, but so known a dastard, dares to say?
      Had he but ev’n beheld the fight, his eyes
      Had witness’d for me what his tongue denies:
      What heaps of Trojans by this hand were slain,
      And how the bloody Tiber swell’d the main.
      All saw, but he, th’ Arcadian troops retire
      In scatter’d squadrons, and their prince expire.
      The giant brothers, in their camp, have found,
      I was not forc’d with ease to quit my ground.
      Not such the Trojans tried me, when, inclos’d,
      I singly their united arms oppos’d:
      First forc’d an entrance thro’ their thick array;
      Then, glutted with their slaughter, freed my way.
      ’Tis a destructive war? So let it be,
      But to the Phrygian pirate, and to thee!
      Meantime proceed to fill the people’s ears
      With false reports, their minds with panic fears:
      Extol the strength of a twice-conquer’d race;
      Our foes encourage, and our friends debase.
      Believe thy fables, and the Trojan town
      Triumphant stands; the Grecians are o’erthrown;
      Suppliant at Hector’s feet Achilles lies,
      And Diomede from fierce Aeneas flies.
      Say rapid Aufidus with awful dread
      Runs backward from the sea, and hides his head,
      When the great Trojan on his bank appears;
      For that’s as true as thy dissembled fears
      Of my revenge. Dismiss that vanity:
      Thou, Drances, art below a death from me.
      Let that vile soul in that vile body rest;
      The lodging is well worthy of the guest.

      “Now, royal father, to the present state
      Of our affairs, and of this high debate:
      If in your arms thus early you diffide,
      And think your fortune is already tried;
      If one defeat has brought us down so low,
      As never more in fields to meet the foe;
      Then I conclude for peace: ’tis time to treat,
      And lie like vassals at the victor’s feet.
      But, O! if any ancient blood remains,
      One drop of all our fathers’, in our veins,
      That man would I prefer before the rest,
      Who dar’d his death with an undaunted breast;
      Who comely fell, by no dishonest wound,
      To shun that sight, and, dying, gnaw’d the ground.
      But, if we still have fresh recruits in store,
      If our confederates can afford us more;
      If the contended field we bravely fought,
      And not a bloodless victory was bought;
      Their losses equal’d ours; and, for their slain,
      With equal fires they fill’d the shining plain;
      Why thus, unforc’d, should we so tamely yield,
      And, ere the trumpet sounds, resign the field?
      Good unexpected, evils unforeseen,
      Appear by turns, as fortune shifts the scene:
      Some, rais’d aloft, come tumbling down amain;
      Then fall so hard, they bound and rise again.
      If Diomede refuse his aid to lend,
      The great Messapus yet remains our friend:
      Tolumnius, who foretells events, is ours;
      Th’ Italian chiefs and princes join their pow’rs:
      Nor least in number, nor in name the last,
      Your own brave subjects have your cause embrac’d
      Above the rest, the Volscian Amazon
      Contains an army in herself alone,
      And heads a squadron, terrible to sight,
      With glitt’ring shields, in brazen armour bright.
      Yet, if the foe a single fight demand,
      And I alone the public peace withstand;
      If you consent, he shall not be refus’d,
      Nor find a hand to victory unus’d.
      This new Achilles, let him take the field,
      With fated armour, and Vulcanian shield!
      For you, my royal father, and my fame,
      I, Turnus, not the least of all my name,
      Devote my soul. He calls me hand to hand,
      And I alone will answer his demand.
      Drances shall rest secure, and neither share
      The danger, nor divide the prize of war.”

      While they debate, nor these nor those will yield,
      Aeneas draws his forces to the field,
      And moves his camp. The scouts with flying speed
      Return, and thro’ the frighted city spread
      Th’ unpleasing news, the Trojans are descried,
      In battle marching by the river side,
      And bending to the town. They take th’ alarm:
      Some tremble, some are bold; all in confusion arm.
      Th’ impetuous youth press forward to the field;
      They clash the sword, and clatter on the shield:
      The fearful matrons raise a screaming cry;
      Old feeble men with fainter groans reply;
      A jarring sound results, and mingles in the sky,
      Like that of swans remurm’ring to the floods,
      Or birds of diff’ring kinds in hollow woods.

      Turnus th’ occasion takes, and cries aloud:
      “Talk on, ye quaint haranguers of the crowd:
      Declaim in praise of peace, when danger calls,
      And the fierce foes in arms approach the walls.”
      He said, and, turning short, with speedy pace,
      Casts back a scornful glance, and quits the place:
      “Thou, Volusus, the Volscian troops command
      To mount; and lead thyself our Ardean band.
      Messapus and Catillus, post your force
      Along the fields, to charge the Trojan horse.
      Some guard the passes, others man the wall;
      Drawn up in arms, the rest attend my call.”

      They swarm from ev’ry quarter of the town,
      And with disorder’d haste the rampires crown.
      Good old Latinus, when he saw, too late,
      The gath’ring storm just breaking on the state,
      Dismiss’d the council till a fitter time,
      And own’d his easy temper as his crime,
      Who, forc’d against his reason, had complied
      To break the treaty for the promis’d bride.

      Some help to sink new trenches; others aid
      To ram the stones, or raise the palisade.
      Hoarse trumpets sound th’ alarm; around the walls
      Runs a distracted crew, whom their last labour calls.
      A sad procession in the streets is seen,
      Of matrons, that attend the mother queen:
      High in her chair she sits, and, at her side,
      With downcast eyes, appears the fatal bride.
      They mount the cliff, where Pallas’ temple stands;
      Pray’rs in their mouths, and presents in their hands,
      With censers first they fume the sacred shrine,
      Then in this common supplication join:
      “O patroness of arms, unspotted maid,
      Propitious hear, and lend thy Latins aid!
      Break short the pirate’s lance; pronounce his fate,
      And lay the Phrygian low before the gate.”

      Now Turnus arms for fight. His back and breast
      Well-temper’d steel and scaly brass invest:
      The cuishes which his brawny thighs infold
      Are mingled metal damask’d o’er with gold.
      His faithful falchion sits upon his side;
      Nor casque, nor crest, his manly features hide:
      But, bare to view, amid surrounding friends,
      With godlike grace, he from the tow’r descends.
      Exulting in his strength, he seems to dare
      His absent rival, and to promise war.
      Freed from his keepers, thus, with broken reins,
      The wanton courser prances o’er the plains,
      Or in the pride of youth o’erleaps the mounds,
      And snuffs the females in forbidden grounds.
      Or seeks his wat’ring in the well-known flood,
      To quench his thirst, and cool his fiery blood:
      He swims luxuriant in the liquid plain,
      And o’er his shoulder flows his waving mane:
      He neighs, he snorts, he bears his head on high;
      Before his ample chest the frothy waters fly.

      Soon as the prince appears without the gate,
      The Volscians, with their virgin leader, wait
      His last commands. Then, with a graceful mien,
      Lights from her lofty steed the warrior queen:
      Her squadron imitates, and each descends;
      Whose common suit Camilla thus commends:
      “If sense of honour, if a soul secure
      Of inborn worth, that can all tests endure,
      Can promise aught, or on itself rely
      Greatly to dare, to conquer or to die;
      Then, I alone, sustain’d by these, will meet
      The Tyrrhene troops, and promise their defeat.
      Ours be the danger, ours the sole renown:
      You, gen’ral, stay behind, and guard the town.”

      Turnus a while stood mute, with glad surprise,
      And on the fierce Virago fix’d his eyes;
      Then thus return’d: “O grace of Italy,
      With what becoming thanks can I reply?
      Not only words lie lab’ring in my breast,
      But thought itself is by thy praise oppress’d.
      Yet rob me not of all; but let me join
      My toils, my hazard, and my fame, with thine.
      The Trojan, not in stratagem unskill’d,
      Sends his light horse before to scour the field:
      Himself, thro’ steep ascents and thorny brakes,
      A larger compass to the city takes.
      This news my scouts confirm, and I prepare
      To foil his cunning, and his force to dare;
      With chosen foot his passage to forelay,
      And place an ambush in the winding way.
      Thou, with thy Volscians, face the Tuscan horse;
      The brave Messapus shall thy troops enforce
      With those of Tibur, and the Latian band,
      Subjected all to thy supreme command.”
      This said, he warns Messapus to the war,
      Then ev’ry chief exhorts with equal care.
      All thus encourag’d, his own troops he joins,
      And hastes to prosecute his deep designs.

      Inclos’d with hills, a winding valley lies,
      By nature form’d for fraud, and fitted for surprise.
      A narrow track, by human steps untrode,
      Leads, thro’ perplexing thorns, to this obscure abode.
      High o’er the vale a steepy mountain stands,
      Whence the surveying sight the nether ground commands.
      The top is level, an offensive seat
      Of war; and from the war a safe retreat:
      For, on the right and left, is room to press
      The foes at hand, or from afar distress;
      To drive ’em headlong downward, and to pour
      On their descending backs a stony show’r.
      Thither young Turnus took the well-known way,
      Possess’d the pass, and in blind ambush lay.

      Meantime Latonian Phoebe, from the skies,
      Beheld th’ approaching war with hateful eyes,
      And call’d the light-foot Opis to her aid,
      Her most belov’d and ever-trusty maid;
      Then with a sigh began: “Camilla goes
      To meet her death amidst her fatal foes:
      The nymphs I lov’d of all my mortal train,
      Invested with Diana’s arms, in vain.
      Nor is my kindness for the virgin new:
      ’Twas born with her; and with her years it grew.
      Her father Metabus, when forc’d away
      From old Privernum, for tyrannic sway,
      Snatch’d up, and sav’d from his prevailing foes,
      This tender babe, companion of his woes.
      Casmilla was her mother; but he drown’d
      One hissing letter in a softer sound,
      And call’d Camilla. Thro’ the woods he flies;
      Wrapp’d in his robe the royal infant lies.
      His foes in sight, he mends his weary pace;
      With shout and clamours they pursue the chase.
      The banks of Amasene at length he gains:

      The raging flood his farther flight restrains,
      Rais’d o’er the borders with unusual rains.
      Prepar’d to plunge into the stream, he fears,
      Not for himself, but for the charge he bears.
      Anxious, he stops a while, and thinks in haste;
      Then, desp’rate in distress, resolves at last.
      A knotty lance of well-boil’d oak he bore;
      The middle part with cork he cover’d o’er:
      He clos’d the child within the hollow space;
      With twigs of bending osier bound the case;
      Then pois’d the spear, heavy with human weight,
      And thus invok’d my favour for the freight:
      ‘Accept, great goddess of the woods,’ he said,
      ‘Sent by her sire, this dedicated maid!
      Thro’ air she flies a suppliant to thy shrine;
      And the first weapons that she knows, are thine.’
      He said; and with full force the spear he threw:
      Above the sounding waves Camilla flew.
      Then, press’d by foes, he stemm’d the stormy tide,
      And gain’d, by stress of arms, the farther side.
      His fasten’d spear he pull’d from out the ground,
      And, victor of his vows, his infant nymph unbound;
      Nor, after that, in towns which walls inclose,
      Would trust his hunted life amidst his foes;
      But, rough, in open air he chose to lie;
      Earth was his couch, his cov’ring was the sky.
      On hills unshorn, or in a desert den,
      He shunn’d the dire society of men.
      A shepherd’s solitary life he led;
      His daughter with the milk of mares he fed.
      The dugs of bears, and ev’ry salvage beast,
      He drew, and thro’ her lips the liquor press’d.
      The little Amazon could scarcely go:
      He loads her with a quiver and a bow;
      And, that she might her stagg’ring steps command,
      He with a slender jav’lin fills her hand.
      Her flowing hair no golden fillet bound;
      Nor swept her trailing robe the dusty ground.
      Instead of these, a tiger’s hide o’erspread
      Her back and shoulders, fasten’d to her head.
      The flying dart she first attempts to fling,
      And round her tender temples toss’d the sling;
      Then, as her strength with years increas’d, began
      To pierce aloft in air the soaring swan,
      And from the clouds to fetch the heron and the crane.
      The Tuscan matrons with each other vied,
      To bless their rival sons with such a bride;
      But she disdains their love, to share with me
      The sylvan shades and vow’d virginity.
      And, O! I wish, contented with my cares
      Of salvage spoils, she had not sought the wars!
      Then had she been of my celestial train,
      And shunn’d the fate that dooms her to be slain.
      But since, opposing Heav’n’s decree, she goes
      To find her death among forbidden foes,
      Haste with these arms, and take thy steepy flight.
      Where, with the gods, averse, the Latins fight.
      This bow to thee, this quiver I bequeath,
      This chosen arrow, to revenge her death:
      By whate’er hand Camilla shall be slain,
      Or of the Trojan or Italian train,
      Let him not pass unpunish’d from the plain.
      Then, in a hollow cloud, myself will aid
      To bear the breathless body of my maid:
      Unspoil’d shall be her arms, and unprofan’d
      Her holy limbs with any human hand,
      And in a marble tomb laid in her native land.”

      She said. The faithful nymph descends from high
      With rapid flight, and cuts the sounding sky:
      Black clouds and stormy winds around her body fly.

      By this, the Trojan and the Tuscan horse,
      Drawn up in squadrons, with united force,
      Approach the walls: the sprightly coursers bound,
      Press forward on their bits, and shift their ground.
      Shields, arms, and spears flash horribly from far;
      And the fields glitter with a waving war.
      Oppos’d to these, come on with furious force
      Messapus, Coras, and the Latian horse;
      These in the body plac’d, on either hand
      Sustain’d and clos’d by fair Camilla’s band.
      Advancing in a line, they couch their spears;
      And less and less the middle space appears.
      Thick smoke obscures the field; and scarce are seen
      The neighing coursers, and the shouting men.
      In distance of their darts they stop their course;
      Then man to man they rush, and horse to horse.
      The face of heav’n their flying jav’lins hide,
      And deaths unseen are dealt on either side.
      Tyrrhenus, and Aconteus, void of fear,
      By mettled coursers borne in full career,
      Meet first oppos’d; and, with a mighty shock,
      Their horses’ heads against each other knock.
      Far from his steed is fierce Aconteus cast,
      As with an engine’s force, or lightning’s blast:
      He rolls along in blood, and breathes his last.
      The Latin squadrons take a sudden fright,
      And sling their shields behind, to save their backs in flight
      Spurring at speed to their own walls they drew;
      Close in the rear the Tuscan troops pursue,
      And urge their flight: Asylas leads the chase;
      Till, seiz’d, with shame, they wheel about and face,
      Receive their foes, and raise a threat’ning cry.
      The Tuscans take their turn to fear and fly.
      So swelling surges, with a thund’ring roar,
      Driv’n on each other’s backs, insult the shore,
      Bound o’er the rocks, incroach upon the land,
      And far upon the beach eject the sand;
      Then backward, with a swing, they take their way,
      Repuls’d from upper ground, and seek their mother sea;
      With equal hurry quit th’ invaded shore,
      And swallow back the sand and stones they spew’d before.

      Twice were the Tuscans masters of the field,
      Twice by the Latins, in their turn, repell’d.
      Asham’d at length, to the third charge they ran;
      Both hosts resolv’d, and mingled man to man.
      Now dying groans are heard; the fields are strow’d
      With falling bodies, and are drunk with blood.
      Arms, horses, men, on heaps together lie:
      Confus’d the fight, and more confus’d the cry.
      Orsilochus, who durst not press too near
      Strong Remulus, at distance drove his spear,
      And stuck the steel beneath his horse’s ear.
      The fiery steed, impatient of the wound,
      Curvets, and, springing upward with a bound,
      His helpless lord cast backward on the ground.
      Catillus pierc’d Iolas first; then drew
      His reeking lance, and at Herminius threw,
      The mighty champion of the Tuscan crew.
      His neck and throat unarm’d, his head was bare,
      But shaded with a length of yellow hair:
      Secure, he fought, expos’d on ev’ry part,
      A spacious mark for swords, and for the flying dart.
      Across the shoulders came the feather’d wound;
      Transfix’d he fell, and doubled to the ground.
      The sands with streaming blood are sanguine dyed,
      And death with honour sought on either side.

      Resistless thro’ the war Camilla rode,
      In danger unappall’d, and pleas’d with blood.
      One side was bare for her exerted breast;
      One shoulder with her painted quiver press’d.
      Now from afar her fatal jav’lins play;
      Now with her ax’s edge she hews her way:
      Diana’s arms upon her shoulder sound;
      And when, too closely press’d, she quits the ground,
      From her bent bow she sends a backward wound.
      Her maids, in martial pomp, on either side,
      Larina, Tulla, fierce Tarpeia, ride:
      Italians all; in peace, their queen’s delight;
      In war, the bold companions of the fight.
      So march’d the Thracian Amazons of old,
      When Thermodon with bloody billows roll’d:
      Such troops as these in shining arms were seen,
      When Theseus met in fight their maiden queen:
      Such to the field Penthesilea led,
      From the fierce virgin when the Grecians fled;
      With such, return’d triumphant from the war,
      Her maids with cries attend the lofty car;
      They clash with manly force their moony shields;
      With female shouts resound the Phrygian fields.

      Who foremost, and who last, heroic maid,
      On the cold earth were by thy courage laid?
      Thy spear, of mountain ash, Eumenius first,
      With fury driv’n, from side to side transpierc’d:
      A purple stream came spouting from the wound;
      Bath’d in his blood he lies, and bites the ground.
      Liris and Pegasus at once she slew:
      The former, as the slacken’d reins he drew
      Of his faint steed; the latter, as he stretch’d
      His arm to prop his friend, the jav’lin reach’d.
      By the same weapon, sent from the same hand,
      Both fall together, and both spurn the sand.
      Amastrus next is added to the slain:
      The rest in rout she follows o’er the plain:
      Tereus, Harpalycus, Demophoon,
      And Chromis, at full speed her fury shun.
      Of all her deadly darts, not one she lost;
      Each was attended with a Trojan ghost.
      Young Ornithus bestrode a hunter steed,
      Swift for the chase, and of Apulian breed.
      Him from afar she spied, in arms unknown:
      O’er his broad back an ox’s hide was thrown;
      His helm a wolf, whose gaping jaws were spread
      A cov’ring for his cheeks, and grinn’d around his head,
      He clench’d within his hand an iron prong,
      And tower’d above the rest, conspicuous in the throng.
      Him soon she singled from the flying train,
      And slew with ease; then thus insults the slain:
      “Vain hunter, didst thou think thro’ woods to chase
      The savage herd, a vile and trembling race?
      Here cease thy vaunts, and own my victory:
      A woman warrior was too strong for thee.
      Yet, if the ghosts demand the conqu’ror’s name,
      Confessing great Camilla, save thy shame.”
      Then Butes and Orsilochus she slew,
      The bulkiest bodies of the Trojan crew;
      But Butes breast to breast: the spear descends
      Above the gorget, where his helmet ends,
      And o’er the shield which his left side defends.
      Orsilochus and she their courses ply:
      He seems to follow, and she seems to fly;
      But in a narrower ring she makes the race;
      And then he flies, and she pursues the chase.
      Gath’ring at length on her deluded foe,
      She swings her ax, and rises to the blow
      Full on the helm behind, with such a sway
      The weapon falls, the riven steel gives way:
      He groans, he roars, he sues in vain for grace;
      Brains, mingled with his blood, besmear his face.

      Astonish’d Aunus just arrives by chance,
      To see his fall; nor farther dares advance;
      But, fixing on the horrid maid his eye,
      He stares, and shakes, and finds it vain to fly;
      Yet, like a true Ligurian, born to cheat,
      (At least while fortune favour’d his deceit,)
      Cries out aloud: “What courage have you shown,
      Who trust your courser’s strength, and not your own?
      Forego the vantage of your horse, alight,
      And then on equal terms begin the fight:
      It shall be seen, weak woman, what you can,
      When, foot to foot, you combat with a man,”
      He said. She glows with anger and disdain,
      Dismounts with speed to dare him on the plain,
      And leaves her horse at large among her train;
      With her drawn sword defies him to the field,
      And, marching, lifts aloft her maiden shield.
      The youth, who thought his cunning did succeed,
      Reins round his horse, and urges all his speed;
      Adds the remembrance of the spur, and hides
      The goring rowels in his bleeding sides.
      “Vain fool, and coward!” cries the lofty maid,
      “Caught in the train which thou thyself hast laid!
      On others practice thy Ligurian arts;
      Thin stratagems and tricks of little hearts
      Are lost on me: nor shalt thou safe retire,
      With vaunting lies, to thy fallacious sire.”
      At this, so fast her flying feet she sped,
      That soon she strain’d beyond his horse’s head:
      Then turning short, at once she seiz’d the rein,
      And laid the boaster grov’ling on the plain.
      Not with more ease the falcon, from above,
      Trusses in middle air the trembling dove,
      Then plumes the prey, in her strong pounces bound:
      The feathers, foul with blood, come tumbling to the ground.

      Now mighty Jove, from his superior height,
      With his broad eye surveys th’ unequal fight.
      He fires the breast of Tarchon with disdain,
      And sends him to redeem th’ abandon’d plain.
      Betwixt the broken ranks the Tuscan rides,
      And these encourages, and those he chides;
      Recalls each leader, by his name, from flight;
      Renews their ardour, and restores the fight.
      “What panic fear has seiz’d your souls? O shame,
      O brand perpetual of th’ Etrurian name!
      Cowards incurable, a woman’s hand
      Drives, breaks, and scatters your ignoble band!
      Now cast away the sword, and quit the shield!
      What use of weapons which you dare not wield?
      Not thus you fly your female foes by night,
      Nor shun the feast, when the full bowls invite;
      When to fat off’rings the glad augur calls,
      And the shrill hornpipe sounds to bacchanals.
      These are your studied cares, your lewd delight:
      Swift to debauch, but slow to manly fight.”
      Thus having said, he spurs amid the foes,
      Not managing the life he meant to lose.
      The first he found he seiz’d with headlong haste,
      In his strong gripe, and clasp’d around the waist;
      ’Twas Venulus, whom from his horse he tore,
      And, laid athwart his own, in triumph bore.
      Loud shouts ensue; the Latins turn their eyes,
      And view th’ unusual sight with vast surprise.
      The fiery Tarchon, flying o’er the plains,
      Press’d in his arms the pond’rous prey sustains;
      Then, with his shorten’d spear, explores around
      His jointed arms, to fix a deadly wound.
      Nor less the captive struggles for his life:
      He writhes his body to prolong the strife,
      And, fencing for his naked throat, exerts
      His utmost vigour, and the point averts.
      So stoops the yellow eagle from on high,
      And bears a speckled serpent thro’ the sky,
      Fast’ning his crooked talons on the prey:
      The pris’ner hisses thro’ the liquid way;
      Resists the royal hawk; and, tho’ oppress’d,
      She fights in volumes, and erects her crest:
      Turn’d to her foe, she stiffens ev’ry scale,
      And shoots her forky tongue, and whisks her threat’ning tail.
      Against the victor, all defence is weak:
      Th’ imperial bird still plies her with his beak;
      He tears her bowels, and her breast he gores;
      Then claps his pinions, and securely soars.
      Thus, thro’ the midst of circling enemies,
      Strong Tarchon snatch’d and bore away his prize.
      The Tyrrhene troops, that shrunk before, now press
      The Latins, and presume the like success.

      Then Aruns, doom’d to death, his arts assay’d,
      To murder, unespied, the Volscian maid:
      This way and that his winding course he bends,
      And, whereso’er she turns, her steps attends.
      When she retires victorious from the chase,
      He wheels about with care, and shifts his place;
      When, rushing on, she seeks her foes in fight,
      He keeps aloof, but keeps her still in sight:
      He threats, and trembles, trying ev’ry way,
      Unseen to kill, and safely to betray.
      Chloreus, the priest of Cybele, from far,
      Glitt’ring in Phrygian arms amidst the war,
      Was by the virgin view’d. The steed he press’d
      Was proud with trappings, and his brawny chest
      With scales of gilded brass was cover’d o’er;
      A robe of Tyrian dye the rider wore.
      With deadly wounds he gall’d the distant foe;
      Gnossian his shafts, and Lycian was his bow:
      A golden helm his front and head surrounds
      A gilded quiver from his shoulder sounds.
      Gold, weav’d with linen, on his thighs he wore,
      With flowers of needlework distinguish’d o’er,
      With golden buckles bound, and gather’d up before.
      Him the fierce maid beheld with ardent eyes,
      Fond and ambitious of so rich a prize,
      Or that the temple might his trophies hold,
      Or else to shine herself in Trojan gold.
      Blind in her haste, she chases him alone.
      And seeks his life, regardless of her own.

      This lucky moment the sly traitor chose:
      Then, starting from his ambush, up he rose,
      And threw, but first to Heav’n address’d his vows:
      “O patron of Socrates’ high abodes,
      Phoebus, the ruling pow’r among the gods,
      Whom first we serve, whole woods of unctuous pine
      Are fell’d for thee, and to thy glory shine;
      By thee protected with our naked soles,
      Thro’ flames unsing’d we march, and tread the kindled coals
      Give me, propitious pow’r, to wash away
      The stains of this dishonourable day:
      Nor spoils, nor triumph, from the fact I claim,
      But with my future actions trust my fame.
      Let me, by stealth, this female plague o’ercome,
      And from the field return inglorious home.”
      Apollo heard, and, granting half his pray’r,
      Shuffled in winds the rest, and toss’d in empty air.
      He gives the death desir’d; his safe return
      By southern tempests to the seas is borne.

      Now, when the jav’lin whizz’d along the skies,
      Both armies on Camilla turn’d their eyes,
      Directed by the sound. Of either host,
      Th’ unhappy virgin, tho’ concern’d the most,
      Was only deaf; so greedy was she bent
      On golden spoils, and on her prey intent;
      Till in her pap the winged weapon stood
      Infix’d, and deeply drunk the purple blood.
      Her sad attendants hasten to sustain
      Their dying lady, drooping on the plain.
      Far from their sight the trembling Aruns flies,
      With beating heart, and fear confus’d with joys;
      Nor dares he farther to pursue his blow,
      Or ev’n to bear the sight of his expiring foe.
      As, when the wolf has torn a bullock’s hide
      At unawares, or ranch’d a shepherd’s side,
      Conscious of his audacious deed, he flies,
      And claps his quiv’ring tail between his thighs:
      So, speeding once, the wretch no more attends,
      But, spurring forward, herds among his friends.

      She wrench’d the jav’lin with her dying hands,
      But wedg’d within her breast the weapon stands;
      The wood she draws, the steely point remains;
      She staggers in her seat with agonizing pains:
      (A gath’ring mist o’erclouds her cheerful eyes,
      And from her cheeks the rosy colour flies:)
      Then turns to her, whom of her female train
      She trusted most, and thus she speaks with pain:
      “Acca, ’tis past! he swims before my sight,
      Inexorable Death; and claims his right.
      Bear my last words to Turnus; fly with speed,
      And bid him timely to my charge succeed,
      Repel the Trojans, and the town relieve:
      Farewell! and in this kiss my parting breath receive.”
      She said, and, sliding, sunk upon the plain:
      Dying, her open’d hand forsakes the rein;
      Short, and more short, she pants; by slow degrees
      Her mind the passage from her body frees.
      She drops her sword; she nods her plumy crest,
      Her drooping head declining on her breast:
      In the last sigh her struggling soul expires,
      And, murm’ring with disdain, to Stygian sounds retires.

      A shout, that struck the golden stars, ensued;
      Despair and rage the languish’d fight renew’d.
      The Trojan troops and Tuscans, in a line,
      Advance to charge; the mix’d Arcadians join.

      But Cynthia’s maid, high seated, from afar
      Surveys the field, and fortune of the war,
      Unmov’d a while, till, prostrate on the plain,
      Welt’ring in blood, she sees Camilla slain,
      And, round her corpse, of friends and foes a fighting train.
      Then, from the bottom of her breast, she drew
      A mournful sigh, and these sad words ensue:
      “Too dear a fine, ah, much lamented maid,
      For warring with the Trojans, thou hast paid!
      Nor aught avail’d, in this unhappy strife,
      Diana’s sacred arms, to save thy life.
      Yet unreveng’d thy goddess will not leave
      Her vot’ry’s death, nor; with vain sorrow grieve.
      Branded the wretch, and be his name abhorr’d;
      But after ages shall thy praise record.
      Th’ inglorious coward soon shall press the plain:
      Thus vows thy queen, and thus the Fates ordain.”

      High o’er the field there stood a hilly mound,
      Sacred the place, and spread with oaks around,
      Where, in a marble tomb, Dercennus lay,
      A king that once in Latium bore the sway.
      The beauteous Opis thither bent her flight,
      To mark the traitor Aruns from the height.
      Him in refulgent arms she soon espied,
      Swoln with success; and loudly thus she cried:
      “Thy backward steps, vain boaster, are too late;
      Turn like a man, at length, and meet thy fate.
      Charg’d with my message, to Camilla go,
      And say I sent thee to the shades below,
      An honour undeserv’d from Cynthia’s bow.”

      She said, and from her quiver chose with speed
      The winged shaft, predestin’d for the deed;
      Then to the stubborn yew her strength applied,
      Till the far distant horns approach’d on either side.
      The bowstring touch’d her breast, so strong she drew;
      Whizzing in air the fatal arrow flew.
      At once the twanging bow and sounding dart
      The traitor heard, and felt the point within his heart.
      Him, beating with his heels in pangs of death,
      His flying friends to foreign fields bequeath.
      The conqu’ring damsel, with expanded wings,
      The welcome message to her mistress brings.

      Their leader lost, the Volscians quit the field,
      And, unsustain’d, the chiefs of Turnus yield.
      The frighted soldiers, when their captains fly,
      More on their speed than on their strength rely.
      Confus’d in flight, they bear each other down,
      And spur their horses headlong to the town.
      Driv’n by their foes, and to their fears resign’d,
      Not once they turn, but take their wounds behind.
      These drop the shield, and those the lance forego,
      Or on their shoulders bear the slacken’d bow.
      The hoofs of horses, with a rattling sound,
      Beat short and thick, and shake the rotten ground.
      Black clouds of dust come rolling in the sky,
      And o’er the darken’d walls and rampires fly.
      The trembling matrons, from their lofty stands,
      Rend heav’n with female shrieks, and wring their hands.
      All pressing on, pursuers and pursued,
      Are crush’d in crowds, a mingled multitude.
      Some happy few escape: the throng too late
      Rush on for entrance, till they choke the gate.
      Ev’n in the sight of home, the wretched sire
      Looks on, and sees his helpless son expire.
      Then, in a fright, the folding gates they close,
      But leave their friends excluded with their foes.
      The vanquish’d cry; the victors loudly shout;
      ’Tis terror all within, and slaughter all without.
      Blind in their fear, they bounce against the wall,
      Or, to the moats pursued, precipitate their fall.

      The Latian virgins, valiant with despair,
      Arm’d on the tow’rs, the common danger share:
      So much of zeal their country’s cause inspir’d;
      So much Camilla’s great example fir’d.
      Poles, sharpen’d in the flames, from high they throw,
      With imitated darts, to gall the foe.
      Their lives for godlike freedom they bequeath,
      And crowd each other to be first in death.
      Meantime to Turnus, ambush’d in the shade,
      With heavy tidings came th’ unhappy maid:
      “The Volscians overthrown, Camilla kill’d;
      The foes, entirely masters of the field,
      Like a resistless flood, come rolling on:
      The cry goes off the plain, and thickens to the town.”

      Inflam’d with rage, (for so the Furies fire
      The Daunian’s breast, and so the Fates require,)
      He leaves the hilly pass, the woods in vain
      Possess’d, and downward issues on the plain.
      Scarce was he gone, when to the straits, now freed
      From secret foes, the Trojan troops succeed.
      Thro’ the black forest and the ferny brake,
      Unknowingly secure, their way they take;
      From the rough mountains to the plain descend,
      And there, in order drawn, their line extend.
      Both armies now in open fields are seen;
      Nor far the distance of the space between.
      Both to the city bend. Aeneas sees,
      Thro’ smoking fields, his hast’ning enemies;
      And Turnus views the Trojans in array,
      And hears th’ approaching horses proudly neigh.
      Soon had their hosts in bloody battle join’d;
      But westward to the sea the sun declin’d.
      Intrench’d before the town both armies lie,
      While night with sable wings involves the sky.




      When Turnus saw the Latins leave the field,
      Their armies broken, and their courage quell’d,
      Himself become the mark of public spite,
      His honour question’d for the promis’d fight;
      The more he was with vulgar hate oppress’d,
      The more his fury boil’d within his breast:
      He rous’d his vigour for the last debate,
      And rais’d his haughty soul to meet his fate.

      As, when the swains the Libyan lion chase,
      He makes a sour retreat, nor mends his pace;
      But, if the pointed jav’lin pierce his side,
      The lordly beast returns with double pride:
      He wrenches out the steel, he roars for pain;
      His sides he lashes, and erects his mane:
      So Turnus fares; his eyeballs flash with fire,
      Thro’ his wide nostrils clouds of smoke expire.

      Trembling with rage, around the court he ran,
      At length approach’d the king, and thus began:
      “No more excuses or delays: I stand
      In arms prepar’d to combat, hand to hand,
      This base deserter of his native land.
      The Trojan, by his word, is bound to take
      The same conditions which himself did make.
      Renew the truce; the solemn rites prepare,
      And to my single virtue trust the war.
      The Latians unconcern’d shall see the fight;
      This arm unaided shall assert your right:
      Then, if my prostrate body press the plain,
      To him the crown and beauteous bride remain.”

      To whom the king sedately thus replied:
      “Brave youth, the more your valour has been tried,
      The more becomes it us, with due respect,
      To weigh the chance of war, which you neglect.
      You want not wealth, or a successive throne,
      Or cities which your arms have made your own:
      My towns and treasures are at your command,
      And stor’d with blooming beauties is my land;
      Laurentum more than one Lavinia sees,
      Unmarried, fair, of noble families.
      Now let me speak, and you with patience hear,
      Things which perhaps may grate a lover’s ear,
      But sound advice, proceeding from a heart
      Sincerely yours, and free from fraudful art.
      The gods, by signs, have manifestly shown,
      No prince Italian born should heir my throne:
      Oft have our augurs, in prediction skill’d,
      And oft our priests, a foreign son reveal’d.
      Yet, won by worth that cannot be withstood,
      Brib’d by my kindness to my kindred blood,
      Urg’d by my wife, who would not be denied,
      I promis’d my Lavinia for your bride:
      Her from her plighted lord by force I took;
      All ties of treaties, and of honour, broke:
      On your account I wag’d an impious war—
      With what success, ’tis needless to declare;
      I and my subjects feel, and you have had your share.
      Twice vanquish’d while in bloody fields we strive,
      Scarce in our walls we keep our hopes alive:
      The rolling flood runs warm with human gore;
      The bones of Latians blanch the neighb’ring shore.
      Why put I not an end to this debate,
      Still unresolv’d, and still a slave to fate?
      If Turnus’ death a lasting peace can give,
      Why should I not procure it whilst you live?
      Should I to doubtful arms your youth betray,
      What would my kinsmen, the Rutulians, say?
      And, should you fall in fight, (which Heav’n defend!)
      How curse the cause which hasten’d to his end
      The daughter’s lover and the father’s friend?
      Weigh in your mind the various chance of war;
      Pity your parent’s age, and ease his care.”

      Such balmy words he pour’d, but all in vain:
      The proffer’d med’cine but provok’d the pain.
      The wrathful youth, disdaining the relief,
      With intermitting sobs thus vents his grief:
      “The care, O best of fathers, which you take
      For my concerns, at my desire forsake.
      Permit me not to languish out my days,
      But make the best exchange of life for praise.
      This arm, this lance, can well dispute the prize;
      And the blood follows, where the weapon flies.
      His goddess mother is not near, to shroud
      The flying coward with an empty cloud.”

      But now the queen, who fear’d for Turnus’ life,
      And loath’d the hard conditions of the strife,
      Held him by force; and, dying in his death,
      In these sad accents gave her sorrow breath:
      “O Turnus, I adjure thee by these tears,
      And whate’er price Amata’s honour bears
      Within thy breast, since thou art all my hope,
      My sickly mind’s repose, my sinking age’s prop;
      Since on the safety of thy life alone
      Depends Latinus, and the Latian throne:
      Refuse me not this one, this only pray’r,
      To waive the combat, and pursue the war.
      Whatever chance attends this fatal strife,
      Think it includes, in thine, Amata’s life.
      I cannot live a slave, or see my throne
      Usurp’d by strangers or a Trojan son.”

      At this, a flood of tears Lavinia shed;
      A crimson blush her beauteous face o’erspread,
      Varying her cheeks by turns with white and red.
      The driving colours, never at a stay,
      Run here and there, and flush, and fade away.
      Delightful change! Thus Indian iv’ry shows,
      Which with the bord’ring paint of purple glows;
      Or lilies damask’d by the neighb’ring rose.

      The lover gaz’d, and, burning with desire,
      The more he look’d, the more he fed the fire:
      Revenge, and jealous rage, and secret spite,
      Roll in his breast, and rouse him to the fight.
      Then fixing on the queen his ardent eyes,
      Firm to his first intent, he thus replies:
      “O mother, do not by your tears prepare
      Such boding omens, and prejudge the war.
      Resolv’d on fight, I am no longer free
      To shun my death, if Heav’n my death decree.”
      Then turning to the herald, thus pursues:
      “Go, greet the Trojan with ungrateful news;
      Denounce from me, that, when tomorrow’s light
      Shall gild the heav’ns, he need not urge the fight;
      The Trojan and Rutulian troops no more
      Shall dye, with mutual blood, the Latian shore:
      Our single swords the quarrel shall decide,
      And to the victor be the beauteous bride.”

      He said, and striding on, with speedy pace,
      He sought his coursers of the Thracian race.
      At his approach they toss their heads on high,
      And, proudly neighing, promise victory.
      The sires of these Orythia sent from far,
      To grace Pilumnus, when he went to war.
      The drifts of Thracian snows were scarce so white,
      Nor northern winds in fleetness match’d their flight.
      Officious grooms stand ready by his side;
      And some with combs their flowing manes divide,
      And others stroke their chests and gently soothe their pride.

      He sheath’d his limbs in arms; a temper’d mass
      Of golden metal those, and mountain brass.
      Then to his head his glitt’ring helm he tied,
      And girt his faithful falchion to his side.
      In his Aetnaean forge, the God of Fire
      That falchion labour’d for the hero’s sire;
      Immortal keenness on the blade bestow’d,
      And plung’d it hissing in the Stygian flood.
      Propp’d on a pillar, which the ceiling bore,
      Was plac’d the lance Auruncan Actor wore;
      Which with such force he brandish’d in his hand,
      The tough ash trembled like an osier wand:
      Then cried: “O pond’rous spoil of Actor slain,
      And never yet by Turnus toss’d in vain,
      Fail not this day thy wonted force; but go,
      Sent by this hand, to pierce the Trojan foe!
      Give me to tear his corslet from his breast,
      And from that eunuch head to rend the crest;
      Dragg’d in the dust, his frizzled hair to soil,
      Hot from the vexing ir’n, and smear’d with fragrant oil!”

      Thus while he raves, from his wide nostrils flies
      A fiery steam, and sparkles from his eyes.
      So fares the bull in his lov’d female’s sight:
      Proudly he bellows, and preludes the fight;
      He tries his goring horns against a tree,
      And meditates his absent enemy;
      He pushes at the winds; he digs the strand
      With his black hoofs, and spurns the yellow sand.

      Nor less the Trojan, in his Lemnian arms,
      To future fight his manly courage warms:
      He whets his fury, and with joy prepares
      To terminate at once the ling’ring wars;
      To cheer his chiefs and tender son, relates
      What Heav’n had promis’d, and expounds the fates.
      Then to the Latian king he sends, to cease
      The rage of arms, and ratify the peace.

      The morn ensuing, from the mountain’s height,
      Had scarcely spread the skies with rosy light;
      Th’ ethereal coursers, bounding from the sea,
      From out their flaming nostrils breath’d the day;
      When now the Trojan and Rutulian guard,
      In friendly labour join’d, the list prepar’d.
      Beneath the walls they measure out the space;
      Then sacred altars rear, on sods of grass,
      Where, with religious rites their common gods they place.
      In purest white the priests their heads attire;
      And living waters bear, and holy fire;
      And, o’er their linen hoods and shaded hair,
      Long twisted wreaths of sacred vervain wear.

      In order issuing from the town appears
      The Latin legion, arm’d with pointed spears;
      And from the fields, advancing on a line,
      The Trojan and the Tuscan forces join:
      Their various arms afford a pleasing sight;
      A peaceful train they seem, in peace prepar’d for fight.
      Betwixt the ranks the proud commanders ride,
      Glitt’ring with gold, and vests in purple dyed;
      Here Mnestheus, author of the Memmian line,
      And there Messapus, born of seed divine.
      The sign is giv’n; and, round the listed space,
      Each man in order fills his proper place.
      Reclining on their ample shields, they stand,
      And fix their pointed lances in the sand.
      Now, studious of the sight, a num’rous throng
      Of either sex promiscuous, old and young,
      Swarm the town: by those who rest behind,
      The gates and walls and houses’ tops are lin’d.
      Meantime the Queen of Heav’n beheld the sight,
      With eyes unpleas’d, from Mount Albano’s height
      (Since call’d Albano by succeeding fame,
      But then an empty hill, without a name).
      She thence survey’d the field, the Trojan pow’rs,
      The Latian squadrons, and Laurentine tow’rs.
      Then thus the goddess of the skies bespoke,
      With sighs and tears, the goddess of the lake,
      King Turnus’ sister, once a lovely maid,
      Ere to the lust of lawless Jove betray’d:
      Compress’d by force, but, by the grateful god,
      Now made the Nais of the neighb’ring flood.
      “O nymph, the pride of living lakes,” said she,
      “O most renown’d, and most belov’d by me,
      Long hast thou known, nor need I to record,
      The wanton sallies of my wand’ring lord.
      Of ev’ry Latian fair whom Jove misled
      To mount by stealth my violated bed,
      To thee alone I grudg’d not his embrace,
      But gave a part of heav’n, and an unenvied place.
      Now learn from me thy near approaching grief,
      Nor think my wishes want to thy relief.
      While fortune favour’d, nor Heav’n’s King denied
      To lend my succour to the Latian side,
      I sav’d thy brother, and the sinking state:
      But now he struggles with unequal fate,
      And goes, with gods averse, o’ermatch’d in might,
      To meet inevitable death in fight;
      Nor must I break the truce, nor can sustain the sight.
      Thou, if thou dar’st thy present aid supply;
      It well becomes a sister’s care to try.”

      At this the lovely nymph, with grief oppress’d,
      Thrice tore her hair, and beat her comely breast.
      To whom Saturnia thus: “Thy tears are late:
      Haste, snatch him, if he can be snatch’d from fate:
      New tumults kindle; violate the truce:
      Who knows what changeful fortune may produce?
      ’Tis not a crime t’ attempt what I decree;
      Or, if it were, discharge the crime on me.”
      She said, and, sailing on the winged wind,
      Left the sad nymph suspended in her mind.

      And now in pomp the peaceful kings appear:
      Four steeds the chariot of Latinus bear;
      Twelve golden beams around his temples play,
      To mark his lineage from the God of Day.
      Two snowy coursers Turnus’ chariot yoke,
      And in his hand two massy spears he shook:
      Then issued from the camp, in arms divine,
      Aeneas, author of the Roman line;
      And by his side Ascanius took his place,
      The second hope of Rome’s immortal race.
      Adorn’d in white, a rev’rend priest appears,
      And off’rings to the flaming altars bears;
      A porket, and a lamb that never suffer’d shears.
      Then to the rising sun he turns his eyes,
      And strews the beasts, design’d for sacrifice,
      With salt and meal: with like officious care
      He marks their foreheads, and he clips their hair.
      Betwixt their horns the purple wine he sheds;
      With the same gen’rous juice the flame he feeds.

      Aeneas then unsheath’d his shining sword,
      And thus with pious pray’rs the gods ador’d:
      “All-seeing sun, and thou, Ausonian soil,
      For which I have sustain’d so long a toil,
      Thou, King of Heav’n, and thou, the Queen of Air,
      Propitious now, and reconcil’d by pray’r;
      Thou, God of War, whose unresisted sway
      The labours and events of arms obey;
      Ye living fountains, and ye running floods,
      All pow’rs of ocean, all ethereal gods,
      Hear, and bear record: if I fall in field,
      Or, recreant in the fight, to Turnus yield,
      My Trojans shall encrease Evander’s town;
      Ascanius shall renounce th’ Ausonian crown:
      All claims, all questions of debate, shall cease;
      Nor he, nor they, with force infringe the peace.
      But, if my juster arms prevail in fight,
      (As sure they shall, if I divine aright,)
      My Trojans shall not o’er th’ Italians reign:
      Both equal, both unconquer’d shall remain,
      Join’d in their laws, their lands, and their abodes;
      I ask but altars for my weary gods.
      The care of those religious rites be mine;
      The crown to King Latinus I resign:
      His be the sov’reign sway. Nor will I share
      His pow’r in peace, or his command in war.
      For me, my friends another town shall frame,
      And bless the rising tow’rs with fair Lavinia’s name.”

      Thus he. Then, with erected eyes and hands,
      The Latian king before his altar stands.
      “By the same heav’n,” said he, “and earth, and main,
      And all the pow’rs that all the three contain;
      By hell below, and by that upper god
      Whose thunder signs the peace, who seals it with his nod;
      So let Latona’s double offspring hear,
      And double-fronted Janus, what I swear:
      I touch the sacred altars, touch the flames,
      And all those pow’rs attest, and all their names;
      Whatever chance befall on either side,
      No term of time this union shall divide:
      No force, no fortune, shall my vows unbind,
      Or shake the steadfast tenor of my mind;
      Not tho’ the circling seas should break their bound,
      O’erflow the shores, or sap the solid ground;
      Not tho’ the lamps of heav’n their spheres forsake,
      Hurl’d down, and hissing in the nether lake:
      Ev’n as this royal scepter” (for he bore
      A scepter in his hand) “shall never more
      Shoot out in branches, or renew the birth:
      An orphan now, cut from the mother earth
      By the keen ax, dishonour’d of its hair,
      And cas’d in brass, for Latian kings to bear.”

      When thus in public view the peace was tied
      With solemn vows, and sworn on either side,
      All dues perform’d which holy rites require;
      The victim beasts are slain before the fire,
      The trembling entrails from their bodies torn,
      And to the fatten’d flames in chargers borne.

      Already the Rutulians deem their man
      O’ermatch’d in arms, before the fight began.
      First rising fears are whisper’d thro’ the crowd;
      Then, gath’ring sound, they murmur more aloud.
      Now, side to side, they measure with their eyes
      The champions’ bulk, their sinews, and their size:
      The nearer they approach, the more is known
      Th’ apparent disadvantage of their own.
      Turnus himself appears in public sight
      Conscious of fate, desponding of the fight.
      Slowly he moves, and at his altar stands
      With eyes dejected, and with trembling hands;
      And, while he mutters undistinguish’d pray’rs,
      A livid deadness in his cheeks appears.

      With anxious pleasure when Juturna view’d
      Th’ increasing fright of the mad multitude,
      When their short sighs and thick’ning sobs she heard,
      And found their ready minds for change prepar’d;
      Dissembling her immortal form, she took
      Camertus’ mien, his habit, and his look;
      A chief of ancient blood; in arms well known
      Was his great sire, and he his greater son.
      His shape assum’d, amid the ranks she ran,
      And humoring their first motions, thus began:
      “For shame, Rutulians, can you bear the sight
      Of one expos’d for all, in single fight?
      Can we, before the face of heav’n, confess
      Our courage colder, or our numbers less?
      View all the Trojan host, th’ Arcadian band,
      And Tuscan army; count ’em as they stand:
      Undaunted to the battle if we go,
      Scarce ev’ry second man will share a foe.
      Turnus, ’tis true, in this unequal strife,
      Shall lose, with honour, his devoted life,
      Or change it rather for immortal fame,
      Succeeding to the gods, from whence he came:
      But you, a servile and inglorious band,
      For foreign lords shall sow your native land,
      Those fruitful fields your fighting fathers gain’d,
      Which have so long their lazy sons sustain’d.”
      With words like these, she carried her design:
      A rising murmur runs along the line.
      Then ev’n the city troops, and Latians, tir’d
      With tedious war, seem with new souls inspir’d:
      Their champion’s fate with pity they lament,
      And of the league, so lately sworn, repent.

      Nor fails the goddess to foment the rage
      With lying wonders, and a false presage;
      But adds a sign, which, present to their eyes,
      Inspires new courage, and a glad surprise.
      For, sudden, in the fiery tracts above,
      Appears in pomp th’ imperial bird of Jove:
      A plump of fowl he spies, that swim the lakes,
      And o’er their heads his sounding pinions shakes;
      Then, stooping on the fairest of the train,
      In his strong talons truss’d a silver swan.
      Th’ Italians wonder at th’ unusual sight;
      But, while he lags, and labours in his flight,
      Behold, the dastard fowl return anew,
      And with united force the foe pursue:
      Clam’rous around the royal hawk they fly,
      And, thick’ning in a cloud, o’ershade the sky.
      They cuff, they scratch, they cross his airy course;
      Nor can th’ incumber’d bird sustain their force;
      But vex’d, not vanquish’d, drops the pond’rous prey,
      And, lighten’d of his burthen, wings his way.

      Th’ Ausonian bands with shouts salute the sight,
      Eager of action, and demand the fight.
      Then King Tolumnius, vers’d in augurs’ arts,
      Cries out, and thus his boasted skill imparts:
      “At length ’tis granted, what I long desir’d!
      This, this is what my frequent vows requir’d.
      Ye gods, I take your omen, and obey.
      Advance, my friends, and charge! I lead the way.
      These are the foreign foes, whose impious band,
      Like that rapacious bird, infest our land:
      But soon, like him, they shall be forc’d to sea
      By strength united, and forego the prey.
      Your timely succour to your country bring,
      Haste to the rescue, and redeem your king.”

      He said; and, pressing onward thro’ the crew,
      Pois’d in his lifted arm, his lance he threw.
      The winged weapon, whistling in the wind,
      Came driving on, nor miss’d the mark design’d.
      At once the cornel rattled in the skies;
      At once tumultuous shouts and clamours rise.
      Nine brothers in a goodly band there stood,
      Born of Arcadian mix’d with Tuscan blood,
      Gylippus’ sons: the fatal jav’lin flew,
      Aim’d at the midmost of the friendly crew.
      A passage thro’ the jointed arms it found,
      Just where the belt was to the body bound,
      And struck the gentle youth extended on the ground.
      Then, fir’d with pious rage, the gen’rous train
      Run madly forward to revenge the slain.
      And some with eager haste their jav’lins throw;
      And some with sword in hand assault the foe.

      The wish’d insult the Latine troops embrace,
      And meet their ardour in the middle space.
      The Trojans, Tuscans, and Arcadian line,
      With equal courage obviate their design.
      Peace leaves the violated fields, and hate
      Both armies urges to their mutual fate.
      With impious haste their altars are o’erturn’d,
      The sacrifice half-broil’d, and half-unburn’d.
      Thick storms of steel from either army fly,
      And clouds of clashing darts obscure the sky;
      Brands from the fire are missive weapons made,
      With chargers, bowls, and all the priestly trade.
      Latinus, frighted, hastens from the fray,
      And bears his unregarded gods away.
      These on their horses vault; those yoke the car;
      The rest, with swords on high, run headlong to the war.

      Messapus, eager to confound the peace,
      Spurr’d his hot courser thro’ the fighting press,
      At King Aulestes, by his purple known
      A Tuscan prince, and by his regal crown;
      And, with a shock encount’ring, bore him down.
      Backward he fell; and, as his fate design’d,
      The ruins of an altar were behind:
      There, pitching on his shoulders and his head,
      Amid the scatt’ring fires he lay supinely spread.
      The beamy spear, descending from above,
      His cuirass pierc’d, and thro’ his body drove.
      Then, with a scornful smile, the victor cries:
      “The gods have found a fitter sacrifice.”
      Greedy of spoils, th’ Italians strip the dead
      Of his rich armour, and uncrown his head.

      Priest Corynaeus, arm’d his better hand,
      From his own altar, with a blazing brand;
      And, as Ebusus with a thund’ring pace
      Advanc’d to battle, dash’d it on his face:
      His bristly beard shines out with sudden fires;
      The crackling crop a noisome scent expires.
      Following the blow, he seiz’d his curling crown
      With his left hand; his other cast him down.
      The prostrate body with his knees he press’d,
      And plung’d his holy poniard in his breast.

      While Podalirius, with his sword, pursued
      The shepherd Alsus thro’ the flying crowd,
      Swiftly he turns, and aims a deadly blow
      Full on the front of his unwary foe.
      The broad ax enters with a crashing sound,
      And cleaves the chin with one continued wound;
      Warm blood, and mingled brains, besmear his arms around
      An iron sleep his stupid eyes oppress’d,
      And seal’d their heavy lids in endless rest.

      But good Aeneas rush’d amid the bands;
      Bare was his head, and naked were his hands,
      In sign of truce: then thus he cries aloud:
      “What sudden rage, what new desire of blood,
      Inflames your alter’d minds? O Trojans, cease
      From impious arms, nor violate the peace!
      By human sanctions, and by laws divine,
      The terms are all agreed; the war is mine.
      Dismiss your fears, and let the fight ensue;
      This hand alone shall right the gods and you:
      Our injur’d altars, and their broken vow,
      To this avenging sword the faithless Turnus owe.”

      Thus while he spoke, unmindful of defence,
      A winged arrow struck the pious prince.
      But, whether from some human hand it came,
      Or hostile god, is left unknown by fame:
      No human hand or hostile god was found,
      To boast the triumph of so base a wound.

      When Turnus saw the Trojan quit the plain,
      His chiefs dismay’d, his troops a fainting train,
      Th’ unhop’d event his heighten’d soul inspires:
      At once his arms and coursers he requires;
      Then, with a leap, his lofty chariot gains,
      And with a ready hand assumes the reins.
      He drives impetuous, and, where’er he goes,
      He leaves behind a lane of slaughter’d foes.
      These his lance reaches; over those he rolls
      His rapid car, and crushes out their souls:
      In vain the vanquish’d fly; the victor sends
      The dead men’s weapons at their living friends.
      Thus, on the banks of Hebrus’ freezing flood,
      The God of Battles, in his angry mood,
      Clashing his sword against his brazen shield,
      Let loose the reins, and scours along the field:
      Before the wind his fiery coursers fly;
      Groans the sad earth, resounds the rattling sky.
      Wrath, Terror, Treason, Tumult, and Despair
      (Dire faces, and deform’d) surround the car;
      Friends of the god, and followers of the war.
      With fury not unlike, nor less disdain,
      Exulting Turnus flies along the plain:
      His smoking horses, at their utmost speed,
      He lashes on, and urges o’er the dead.
      Their fetlocks run with blood; and, when they bound,
      The gore and gath’ring dust are dash’d around.
      Thamyris and Pholus, masters of the war,
      He kill’d at hand, but Sthenelus afar:
      From far the sons of Imbracus he slew,
      Glaucus and Lades, of the Lycian crew;
      Both taught to fight on foot, in battle join’d,
      Or mount the courser that outstrips the wind.

      Meantime Eumedes, vaunting in the field,
      New fir’d the Trojans, and their foes repell’d.
      This son of Dolon bore his grandsire’s name,
      But emulated more his father’s fame;
      His guileful father, sent a nightly spy,
      The Grecian camp and order to descry:
      Hard enterprise! and well he might require
      Achilles’ car and horses, for his hire:
      But, met upon the scout, th’ Aetolian prince
      In death bestow’d a juster recompense.
      Fierce Turnus view’d the Trojan from afar,
      And launch’d his jav’lin from his lofty car;
      Then lightly leaping down, pursued the blow,
      And, pressing with his foot his prostrate foe,
      Wrench’d from his feeble hold the shining sword,
      And plung’d it in the bosom of its lord.
      “Possess,” said he, “the fruit of all thy pains,
      And measure, at thy length, our Latian plains.
      Thus are my foes rewarded by my hand;
      Thus may they build their town, and thus enjoy the land!”

      Then Dares, Butes, Sybaris he slew,
      Whom o’er his neck his flound’ring courser threw.
      As when loud Boreas, with his blust’ring train,
      Stoops from above, incumbent on the main;
      Where’er he flies, he drives the rack before,
      And rolls the billows on th’ Aegaean shore:
      So, where resistless Turnus takes his course,
      The scatter’d squadrons bend before his force;
      His crest of horses’ hair is blown behind
      By adverse air, and rustles in the wind.

      This haughty Phegeus saw with high disdain,
      And, as the chariot roll’d along the plain,
      Light from the ground he leapt, and seiz’d the rein.
      Thus hung in air, he still retain’d his hold,
      The coursers frighted, and their course controll’d.
      The lance of Turnus reach’d him as he hung,
      And pierc’d his plated arms, but pass’d along,
      And only raz’d the skin. He turn’d, and held
      Against his threat’ning foe his ample shield;
      Then call’d for aid: but, while he cried in vain,
      The chariot bore him backward on the plain.
      He lies revers’d; the victor king descends,
      And strikes so justly where his helmet ends,
      He lops the head. The Latian fields are drunk
      With streams that issue from the bleeding trunk.

      While he triumphs, and while the Trojans yield,
      The wounded prince is forc’d to leave the field:
      Strong Mnestheus, and Achates often tried,
      And young Ascanius, weeping by his side,
      Conduct him to his tent. Scarce can he rear
      His limbs from earth, supported on his spear.
      Resolv’d in mind, regardless of the smart,
      He tugs with both his hands, and breaks the dart.
      The steel remains. No readier way he found
      To draw the weapon, than t’ inlarge the wound.
      Eager of fight, impatient of delay,
      He begs; and his unwilling friends obey.

      Iapis was at hand to prove his art,
      Whose blooming youth so fir’d Apollo’s heart,
      That, for his love, he proffer’d to bestow
      His tuneful harp and his unerring bow.
      The pious youth, more studious how to save
      His aged sire, now sinking to the grave,
      Preferr’d the pow’r of plants, and silent praise
      Of healing arts, before Phoebean bays.

      Propp’d on his lance the pensive hero stood,
      And heard and saw, unmov’d, the mourning crowd.
      The fam’d physician tucks his robes around
      With ready hands, and hastens to the wound.
      With gentle touches he performs his part,
      This way and that, soliciting the dart,
      And exercises all his heav’nly art.
      All soft’ning simples, known of sov’reign use,
      He presses out, and pours their noble juice.
      These first infus’d, to lenify the pain,
      He tugs with pincers, but he tugs in vain.
      Then to the patron of his art he pray’d:
      The patron of his art refus’d his aid.

      Meantime the war approaches to the tents;
      Th’ alarm grows hotter, and the noise augments:
      The driving dust proclaims the danger near;
      And first their friends, and then their foes appear:
      Their friends retreat; their foes pursue the rear.
      The camp is fill’d with terror and affright:
      The hissing shafts within the trench alight;
      An undistinguish’d noise ascends the sky,
      The shouts of those who kill, and groans of those who die.

      But now the goddess mother, mov’d with grief,
      And pierc’d with pity, hastens her relief.
      A branch of healing dittany she brought,
      Which in the Cretan fields with care she sought:
      Rough is the stem, which woolly leafs surround;
      The leafs with flow’rs, the flow’rs with purple crown’d,
      Well known to wounded goats; a sure relief
      To draw the pointed steel, and ease the grief.
      This Venus brings, in clouds involv’d, and brews
      Th’ extracted liquor with ambrosian dews,
      And odorous panacee. Unseen she stands,
      Temp’ring the mixture with her heav’nly hands,
      And pours it in a bowl, already crown’d
      With juice of med’c’nal herbs prepar’d to bathe the wound.
      The leech, unknowing of superior art
      Which aids the cure, with this foments the part;
      And in a moment ceas’d the raging smart.
      Stanch’d is the blood, and in the bottom stands:
      The steel, but scarcely touch’d with tender hands,
      Moves up, and follows of its own accord,
      And health and vigour are at once restor’d.
      Iapis first perceiv’d the closing wound,
      And first the footsteps of a god he found.
      “Arms! arms!” he cries; “the sword and shield prepare,
      And send the willing chief, renew’d, to war.
      This is no mortal work, no cure of mine,
      Nor art’s effect, but done by hands divine.
      Some god our general to the battle sends;
      Some god preserves his life for greater ends.”

      The hero arms in haste; his hands infold
      His thighs with cuishes of refulgent gold:
      Inflam’d to fight, and rushing to the field,
      That hand sustaining the celestial shield,
      This gripes the lance, and with such vigour shakes,
      That to the rest the beamy weapon quakes.
      Then with a close embrace he strain’d his son,
      And, kissing thro’ his helmet, thus begun:
      “My son, from my example learn the war,
      In camps to suffer, and in fields to dare;
      But happier chance than mine attend thy care!
      This day my hand thy tender age shall shield,
      And crown with honours of the conquer’d field:
      Thou, when thy riper years shall send thee forth
      To toils of war, be mindful of my worth;
      Assert thy birthright, and in arms be known,
      For Hector’s nephew, and Aeneas’ son.”
      He said; and, striding, issued on the plain.
      Anteus and Mnestheus, and a num’rous train,
      Attend his steps; the rest their weapons take,
      And, crowding to the field, the camp forsake.
      A cloud of blinding dust is rais’d around,
      Labours beneath their feet the trembling ground.

      Now Turnus, posted on a hill, from far
      Beheld the progress of the moving war:
      With him the Latins view’d the cover’d plains,
      And the chill blood ran backward in their veins.
      Juturna saw th’ advancing troops appear,
      And heard the hostile sound, and fled for fear.
      Aeneas leads; and draws a sweeping train,
      Clos’d in their ranks, and pouring on the plain.
      As when a whirlwind, rushing to the shore
      From the mid ocean, drives the waves before;
      The painful hind with heavy heart foresees
      The flatted fields, and slaughter of the trees;
      With like impetuous rage the prince appears
      Before his doubled front, nor less destruction bears.
      And now both armies shock in open field;
      Osiris is by strong Thymbraeus kill’d.
      Archetius, Ufens, Epulon, are slain
      (All fam’d in arms, and of the Latian train)
      By Gyas’, Mnestheus’, and Achates’ hand.
      The fatal augur falls, by whose command
      The truce was broken, and whose lance, embrued
      With Trojan blood, th’ unhappy fight renew’d.
      Loud shouts and clamours rend the liquid sky,
      And o’er the field the frighted Latins fly.
      The prince disdains the dastards to pursue,
      Nor moves to meet in arms the fighting few;
      Turnus alone, amid the dusky plain,
      He seeks, and to the combat calls in vain.
      Juturna heard, and, seiz’d with mortal fear,
      Forc’d from the beam her brother’s charioteer;
      Assumes his shape, his armour, and his mien,
      And, like Metiscus, in his seat is seen.

      As the black swallow near the palace plies;
      O’er empty courts, and under arches, flies;
      Now hawks aloft, now skims along the flood,
      To furnish her loquacious nest with food:
      So drives the rapid goddess o’er the plains;
      The smoking horses run with loosen’d reins.
      She steers a various course among the foes;
      Now here, now there, her conqu’ring brother shows;
      Now with a straight, now with a wheeling flight,
      She turns, and bends, but shuns the single fight.
      Aeneas, fir’d with fury, breaks the crowd,
      And seeks his foe, and calls by name aloud:
      He runs within a narrower ring, and tries
      To stop the chariot; but the chariot flies.
      If he but gain a glimpse, Juturna fears,
      And far away the Daunian hero bears.

      What should he do! Nor arts nor arms avail;
      And various cares in vain his mind assail.
      The great Messapus, thund’ring thro’ the field,
      In his left hand two pointed jav’lins held:
      Encount’ring on the prince, one dart he drew,
      And with unerring aim and utmost vigour threw.
      Aeneas saw it come, and, stooping low
      Beneath his buckler, shunn’d the threat’ning blow.
      The weapon hiss’d above his head, and tore
      The waving plume which on his helm he wore.
      Forced by this hostile act, and fir’d with spite,
      That flying Turnus still declin’d the fight,
      The Prince, whose piety had long repell’d
      His inborn ardour, now invades the field;
      Invokes the pow’rs of violated peace,
      Their rites and injur’d altars to redress;
      Then, to his rage abandoning the rein,
      With blood and slaughter’d bodies fills the plain.

      What god can tell, what numbers can display,
      The various labours of that fatal day;
      What chiefs and champions fell on either side,
      In combat slain, or by what deaths they died;
      Whom Turnus, whom the Trojan hero kill’d;
      Who shar’d the fame and fortune of the field!
      Jove, could’st thou view, and not avert thy sight,
      Two jarring nations join’d in cruel fight,
      Whom leagues of lasting love so shortly shall unite!

      Aeneas first Rutulian Sucro found,
      Whose valour made the Trojans quit their ground;
      Betwixt his ribs the jav’lin drove so just,
      It reach’d his heart, nor needs a second thrust.
      Now Turnus, at two blows, two brethren slew;
      First from his horse fierce Amycus he threw:
      Then, leaping on the ground, on foot assail’d
      Diores, and in equal fight prevail’d.
      Their lifeless trunks he leaves upon the place;
      Their heads, distilling gore, his chariot grace.

      Three cold on earth the Trojan hero threw,
      Whom without respite at one charge he slew:
      Cethegus, Tanais, Tagus, fell oppress’d,
      And sad Onythes, added to the rest,
      Of Theban blood, whom Peridia bore.

      Turnus two brothers from the Lycian shore,
      And from Apollo’s fane to battle sent,
      O’erthrew; nor Phoebus could their fate prevent.
      Peaceful Menoetes after these he kill’d,
      Who long had shunn’d the dangers of the field:
      On Lerna’s lake a silent life he led,
      And with his nets and angle earn’d his bread;
      Nor pompous cares, nor palaces, he knew,
      But wisely from th’ infectious world withdrew:
      Poor was his house; his father’s painful hand
      Discharg’d his rent, and plow’d another’s land.

      As flames among the lofty woods are thrown
      On diff’rent sides, and both by winds are blown;
      The laurels crackle in the sputt’ring fire;
      The frighted sylvans from their shades retire:
      Or as two neighb’ring torrents fall from high;
      Rapid they run; the foamy waters fry;
      They roll to sea with unresisted force,
      And down the rocks precipitate their course:
      Not with less rage the rival heroes take
      Their diff’rent ways, nor less destruction make.
      With spears afar, with swords at hand, they strike;
      And zeal of slaughter fires their souls alike.
      Like them, their dauntless men maintain the field;
      And hearts are pierc’d, unknowing how to yield:
      They blow for blow return, and wound for wound;
      And heaps of bodies raise the level ground.

      Murranus, boasting of his blood, that springs
      From a long royal race of Latian kings,
      Is by the Trojan from his chariot thrown,
      Crush’d with the weight of an unwieldy stone:
      Betwixt the wheels he fell; the wheels, that bore
      His living load, his dying body tore.
      His starting steeds, to shun the glitt’ring sword,
      Paw down his trampled limbs, forgetful of their lord.

      Fierce Hyllus threaten’d high, and, face to face,
      Affronted Turnus in the middle space:
      The prince encounter’d him in full career,
      And at his temples aim’d the deadly spear;
      So fatally the flying weapon sped,
      That thro’ his brazen helm it pierc’d his head.
      Nor, Cisseus, couldst thou scape from Turnus’ hand,
      In vain the strongest of th’ Arcadian band:
      Nor to Cupentus could his gods afford
      Availing aid against th’ Aenean sword,
      Which to his naked heart pursued the course;
      Nor could his plated shield sustain the force.

      Iolas fell, whom not the Grecian pow’rs,
      Nor great subverter of the Trojan tow’rs,
      Were doom’d to kill, while Heav’n prolong’d his date;
      But who can pass the bounds, prefix’d by fate?
      In high Lyrnessus, and in Troy, he held
      Two palaces, and was from each expell’d:
      Of all the mighty man, the last remains
      A little spot of foreign earth contains.

      And now both hosts their broken troops unite
      In equal ranks, and mix in mortal fight.
      Seresthus and undaunted Mnestheus join
      The Trojan, Tuscan, and Arcadian line:
      Sea-born Messapus, with Atinas, heads
      The Latin squadrons, and to battle leads.
      They strike, they push, they throng the scanty space,
      Resolv’d on death, impatient of disgrace;
      And, where one falls, another fills his place.

      The Cyprian goddess now inspires her son
      To leave th’ unfinish’d fight, and storm the town:
      For, while he rolls his eyes around the plain
      In quest of Turnus, whom he seeks in vain,
      He views th’ unguarded city from afar,
      In careless quiet, and secure of war.
      Occasion offers, and excites his mind
      To dare beyond the task he first design’d.
      Resolv’d, he calls his chiefs; they leave the fight:
      Attended thus, he takes a neighb’ring height;
      The crowding troops about their gen’ral stand,
      All under arms, and wait his high command.
      Then thus the lofty prince: “Hear and obey,
      Ye Trojan bands, without the least delay
      Jove is with us; and what I have decreed
      Requires our utmost vigour, and our speed.
      Your instant arms against the town prepare,
      The source of mischief, and the seat of war.
      This day the Latian tow’rs, that mate the sky,
      Shall level with the plain in ashes lie:
      The people shall be slaves, unless in time
      They kneel for pardon, and repent their crime.
      Twice have our foes been vanquish’d on the plain:
      Then shall I wait till Turnus will be slain?
      Your force against the perjur’d city bend.
      There it began, and there the war shall end.
      The peace profan’d our rightful arms requires;
      Cleanse the polluted place with purging fires.”

      He finish’d; and, one soul inspiring all,
      Form’d in a wedge, the foot approach the wall.
      Without the town, an unprovided train
      Of gaping, gazing citizens are slain.
      Some firebrands, others scaling ladders bear,
      And those they toss aloft, and these they rear:
      The flames now launch’d, the feather’d arrows fly,
      And clouds of missive arms obscure the sky.
      Advancing to the front, the hero stands,
      And, stretching out to heav’n his pious hands,
      Attests the gods, asserts his innocence,
      Upbraids with breach of faith th’ Ausonian prince;
      Declares the royal honour doubly stain’d,
      And twice the rites of holy peace profan’d.

      Dissenting clamours in the town arise;
      Each will be heard, and all at once advise.
      One part for peace, and one for war contends;
      Some would exclude their foes, and some admit their friends.
      The helpless king is hurried in the throng,
      And, whate’er tide prevails, is borne along.
      Thus, when the swain, within a hollow rock,
      Invades the bees with suffocating smoke,
      They run around, or labour on their wings,
      Disus’d to flight, and shoot their sleepy stings;
      To shun the bitter fumes in vain they try;
      Black vapours, issuing from the vent, involve the sky.

      But fate and envious fortune now prepare
      To plunge the Latins in the last despair.
      The queen, who saw the foes invade the town,
      And brands on tops of burning houses thrown,
      Cast round her eyes, distracted with her fear—
      No troops of Turnus in the field appear.
      Once more she stares abroad, but still in vain,
      And then concludes the royal youth is slain.
      Mad with her anguish, impotent to bear
      The mighty grief, she loathes the vital air.
      She calls herself the cause of all this ill,
      And owns the dire effects of her ungovern’d will;
      She raves against the gods; she beats her breast;
      She tears with both her hands her purple vest:
      Then round a beam a running noose she tied,
      And, fasten’d by the neck, obscenely died.

      Soon as the fatal news by Fame was blown,
      And to her dames and to her daughter known,
      The sad Lavinia rends her yellow hair
      And rosy cheeks; the rest her sorrow share:
      With shrieks the palace rings, and madness of despair.
      The spreading rumour fills the public place:
      Confusion, fear, distraction, and disgrace,
      And silent shame, are seen in ev’ry face.
      Latinus tears his garments as he goes,
      Both for his public and his private woes;
      With filth his venerable beard besmears,
      And sordid dust deforms his silver hairs.
      And much he blames the softness of his mind,
      Obnoxious to the charms of womankind,
      And soon seduc’d to change what he so well design’d;
      To break the solemn league so long desir’d,
      Nor finish what his fates, and those of Troy, requir’d.

      Now Turnus rolls aloof o’er empty plains,
      And here and there some straggling foes he gleans.
      His flying coursers please him less and less,
      Asham’d of easy fight and cheap success.
      Thus half-contented, anxious in his mind,
      The distant cries come driving in the wind,
      Shouts from the walls, but shouts in murmurs drown’d;
      A jarring mixture, and a boding sound.
      “Alas!” said he, “what mean these dismal cries?
      What doleful clamours from the town arise?”
      Confus’d, he stops, and backward pulls the reins.
      She who the driver’s office now sustains,
      Replies: “Neglect, my lord, these new alarms;
      Here fight, and urge the fortune of your arms:
      There want not others to defend the wall.
      If by your rival’s hand th’ Italians fall,
      So shall your fatal sword his friends oppress,
      In honour equal, equal in success.”

      To this, the prince: “O sister—for I knew
      The peace infring’d proceeded first from you;
      I knew you, when you mingled first in fight;
      And now in vain you would deceive my sight—
      Why, goddess, this unprofitable care?
      Who sent you down from heav’n, involv’d in air,
      Your share of mortal sorrows to sustain,
      And see your brother bleeding on the plain?
      For to what pow’r can Turnus have recourse,
      Or how resist his fate’s prevailing force?
      These eyes beheld Murranus bite the ground:
      Mighty the man, and mighty was the wound.
      I heard my dearest friend, with dying breath,
      My name invoking to revenge his death.
      Brave Ufens fell with honour on the place,
      To shun the shameful sight of my disgrace.
      On earth supine, a manly corpse he lies;
      His vest and armour are the victor’s prize.
      Then, shall I see Laurentum in a flame,
      Which only wanted, to complete my shame?
      How will the Latins hoot their champion’s flight!
      How Drances will insult and point them to the sight!
      Is death so hard to bear? Ye gods below,
      (Since those above so small compassion show,)
      Receive a soul unsullied yet with shame,
      Which not belies my great forefather’s name!”

      He said; and while he spoke, with flying speed
      Came Sages urging on his foamy steed:
      Fix’d on his wounded face a shaft he bore,
      And, seeking Turnus, sent his voice before:
      “Turnus, on you, on you alone, depends
      Our last relief: compassionate your friends!
      Like lightning, fierce Aeneas, rolling on,
      With arms invests, with flames invades the town:
      The brands are toss’d on high; the winds conspire
      To drive along the deluge of the fire.
      All eyes are fix’d on you: your foes rejoice;
      Ev’n the king staggers, and suspends his choice;
      Doubts to deliver or defend the town,
      Whom to reject, or whom to call his son.
      The queen, on whom your utmost hopes were plac’d,
      Herself suborning death, has breath’d her last.
      ’Tis true, Messapus, fearless of his fate,
      With fierce Atinas’ aid, defends the gate:
      On ev’ry side surrounded by the foe,
      The more they kill, the greater numbers grow;
      An iron harvest mounts, and still remains to mow.
      You, far aloof from your forsaken bands,
      Your rolling chariot drive o’er empty sands.

      Stupid he sate, his eyes on earth declin’d,
      And various cares revolving in his mind:
      Rage, boiling from the bottom of his breast,
      And sorrow mix’d with shame, his soul oppress’d;
      And conscious worth lay lab’ring in his thought,
      And love by jealousy to madness wrought.
      By slow degrees his reason drove away
      The mists of passion, and resum’d her sway.
      Then, rising on his car, he turn’d his look,
      And saw the town involv’d in fire and smoke.
      A wooden tow’r with flames already blaz’d,
      Which his own hands on beams and rafters rais’d;
      And bridges laid above to join the space,
      And wheels below to roll from place to place.
      “Sister, the Fates have vanquish’d: let us go
      The way which Heav’n and my hard fortune show.
      The fight is fix’d; nor shall the branded name
      Of a base coward blot your brother’s fame.
      Death is my choice; but suffer me to try
      My force, and vent my rage before I die.”
      He said; and, leaping down without delay,
      Thro’ crowds of scatter’d foes he freed his way.
      Striding he pass’d, impetuous as the wind,
      And left the grieving goddess far behind.
      As when a fragment, from a mountain torn
      By raging tempests, or by torrents borne,
      Or sapp’d by time, or loosen’d from the roots—
      Prone thro’ the void the rocky ruin shoots,
      Rolling from crag to crag, from steep to steep;
      Down sink, at once, the shepherds and their sheep:
      Involv’d alike, they rush to nether ground;
      Stunn’d with the shock they fall, and stunn’d from earth rebound:
      So Turnus, hasting headlong to the town,
      Should’ring and shoving, bore the squadrons down.
      Still pressing onward, to the walls he drew,
      Where shafts, and spears, and darts promiscuous flew,
      And sanguine streams the slipp’ry ground embrue.
      First stretching out his arm, in sign of peace,
      He cries aloud, to make the combat cease:
      “Rutulians, hold; and Latin troops, retire!
      The fight is mine; and me the gods require.
      ’Tis just that I should vindicate alone
      The broken truce, or for the breach atone.
      This day shall free from wars th’ Ausonian state,
      Or finish my misfortunes in my fate.”

      Both armies from their bloody work desist,
      And, bearing backward, form a spacious list.
      The Trojan hero, who receiv’d from fame
      The welcome sound, and heard the champion’s name,
      Soon leaves the taken works and mounted walls,
      Greedy of war where greater glory calls.
      He springs to fight, exulting in his force
      His jointed armour rattles in the course.
      Like Eryx, or like Athos, great he shows,
      Or Father Apennine, when, white with snows,
      His head divine obscure in clouds he hides,
      And shakes the sounding forest on his sides.
      The nations, overaw’d, surcease the fight;
      Immovable their bodies, fix’d their sight.
      Ev’n death stands still; nor from above they throw
      Their darts, nor drive their batt’ring-rams below.
      In silent order either army stands,
      And drop their swords, unknowing, from their hands.
      Th’ Ausonian king beholds, with wond’ring sight,
      Two mighty champions match’d in single fight,
      Born under climes remote, and brought by fate,
      With swords to try their titles to the state.

      Now, in clos’d field, each other from afar
      They view; and, rushing on, begin the war.
      They launch their spears; then hand to hand they meet;
      The trembling soil resounds beneath their feet:
      Their bucklers clash; thick blows descend from high,
      And flakes of fire from their hard helmets fly.
      Courage conspires with chance, and both engage
      With equal fortune yet, and mutual rage.
      As when two bulls for their fair female fight
      In Sila’s shades, or on Taburnus’ height;
      With horns adverse they meet; the keeper flies;
      Mute stands the herd; the heifers roll their eyes,
      And wait th’ event; which victor they shall bear,
      And who shall be the lord, to rule the lusty year:
      With rage of love the jealous rivals burn,
      And push for push, and wound for wound return;
      Their dewlaps gor’d, their sides are lav’d in blood;
      Loud cries and roaring sounds rebellow thro’ the wood:
      Such was the combat in the listed ground;
      So clash their swords, and so their shields resound.

      Jove sets the beam; in either scale he lays
      The champions’ fate, and each exactly weighs.
      On this side, life and lucky chance ascends;
      Loaded with death, that other scale descends.
      Rais’d on the stretch, young Turnus aims a blow
      Full on the helm of his unguarded foe:
      Shrill shouts and clamours ring on either side,
      As hopes and fears their panting hearts divide.
      But all in pieces flies the traitor sword,
      And, in the middle stroke, deserts his lord.
      Now is but death, or flight; disarm’d he flies,
      When in his hand an unknown hilt he spies.
      Fame says that Turnus, when his steeds he join’d,
      Hurrying to war, disorder’d in his mind,
      Snatch’d the first weapon which his haste could find.
      ’Twas not the fated sword his father bore,
      But that his charioteer Metiscus wore.
      This, while the Trojans fled, the toughness held;
      But, vain against the great Vulcanian shield,
      The mortal-temper’d steel deceiv’d his hand:
      The shiver’d fragments shone amid the sand.

      Surpris’d with fear, he fled along the field,
      And now forthright, and now in orbits wheel’d;
      For here the Trojan troops the list surround,
      And there the pass is clos’d with pools and marshy ground.
      Aeneas hastens, tho’ with heavier pace—
      His wound, so newly knit, retards the chase,
      And oft his trembling knees their aid refuse—
      Yet, pressing foot by foot, his foe pursues.

      Thus, when a fearful stag is clos’d around
      With crimson toils, or in a river found,
      High on the bank the deep-mouth’d hound appears,
      Still opening, following still, where’er he steers;
      The persecuted creature, to and fro,
      Turns here and there, to scape his Umbrian foe:
      Steep is th’ ascent, and, if he gains the land,
      The purple death is pitch’d along the strand.
      His eager foe, determin’d to the chase,
      Stretch’d at his length, gains ground at ev’ry pace;
      Now to his beamy head he makes his way,
      And now he holds, or thinks he holds, his prey:
      Just at the pinch, the stag springs out with fear;
      He bites the wind, and fills his sounding jaws with air:
      The rocks, the lakes, the meadows ring with cries;
      The mortal tumult mounts, and thunders in the skies.
      Thus flies the Daunian prince, and, flying, blames
      His tardy troops, and, calling by their names,
      Demands his trusty sword. The Trojan threats
      The realm with ruin, and their ancient seats
      To lay in ashes, if they dare supply
      With arms or aid his vanquish’d enemy:
      Thus menacing, he still pursues the course,
      With vigour, tho’ diminish’d of his force.
      Ten times already round the listed place
      One chief had fled, and t’ other giv’n the chase:
      No trivial prize is play’d; for on the life
      Or death of Turnus now depends the strife.

      Within the space, an olive tree had stood,
      A sacred shade, a venerable wood,
      For vows to Faunus paid, the Latins’ guardian god.
      Here hung the vests, and tablets were engrav’d,
      Of sinking mariners from shipwreck sav’d.
      With heedless hands the Trojans fell’d the tree,
      To make the ground enclos’d for combat free.
      Deep in the root, whether by fate, or chance,
      Or erring haste, the Trojan drove his lance;
      Then stoop’d, and tugg’d with force immense, to free
      Th’ incumber’d spear from the tenacious tree;
      That, whom his fainting limbs pursued in vain,
      His flying weapon might from far attain.

      Confus’d with fear, bereft of human aid,
      Then Turnus to the gods, and first to Faunus pray’d:
      “O Faunus, pity! and thou Mother Earth,
      Where I thy foster son receiv’d my birth,
      Hold fast the steel! If my religious hand
      Your plant has honour’d, which your foes profan’d,
      Propitious hear my pious pray’r!” He said,
      Nor with successless vows invok’d their aid.
      Th’ incumbent hero wrench’d, and pull’d, and strain’d;
      But still the stubborn earth the steel detain’d.
      Juturna took her time; and, while in vain
      He strove, assum’d Meticus’ form again,
      And, in that imitated shape, restor’d
      To the despairing prince his Daunian sword.
      The Queen of Love, who, with disdain and grief,
      Saw the bold nymph afford this prompt relief,
      T’ assert her offspring with a greater deed,
      From the tough root the ling’ring weapon freed.

      Once more erect, the rival chiefs advance:
      One trusts the sword, and one the pointed lance;
      And both resolv’d alike to try their fatal chance.

      Meantime imperial Jove to Juno spoke,
      Who from a shining cloud beheld the shock:
      “What new arrest, O Queen of Heav’n, is sent
      To stop the Fates now lab’ring in th’ event?
      What farther hopes are left thee to pursue?
      Divine Aeneas, (and thou know’st it too,)
      Foredoom’d, to these celestial seats are due.
      What more attempts for Turnus can be made,
      That thus thou ling’rest in this lonely shade?
      Is it becoming of the due respect
      And awful honour of a god elect,
      A wound unworthy of our state to feel,
      Patient of human hands and earthly steel?
      Or seems it just, the sister should restore
      A second sword, when one was lost before,
      And arm a conquer’d wretch against his conqueror?
      For what, without thy knowledge and avow,
      Nay more, thy dictate, durst Juturna do?
      At last, in deference to my love, forbear
      To lodge within thy soul this anxious care;
      Reclin’d upon my breast, thy grief unload:
      Who should relieve the goddess, but the god?
      Now all things to their utmost issue tend,
      Push’d by the Fates to their appointed end.
      While leave was giv’n thee, and a lawful hour
      For vengeance, wrath, and unresisted pow’r,
      Toss’d on the seas, thou couldst thy foes distress,
      And, driv’n ashore, with hostile arms oppress;
      Deform the royal house; and, from the side
      Of the just bridegroom, tear the plighted bride:
      Now cease at my command.” The Thund’rer said;
      And, with dejected eyes, this answer Juno made:
      “Because your dread decree too well I knew,
      From Turnus and from earth unwilling I withdrew.
      Else should you not behold me here, alone,
      Involv’d in empty clouds, my friends bemoan,
      But, girt with vengeful flames, in open sight
      Engag’d against my foes in mortal fight.
      ’Tis true, Juturna mingled in the strife
      By my command, to save her brother’s life,
      At least to try; but, by the Stygian lake,
      (The most religious oath the gods can take,)
      With this restriction, not to bend the bow,
      Or toss the spear, or trembling dart to throw.
      And now, resign’d to your superior might,
      And tir’d with fruitless toils, I loathe the fight.
      This let me beg (and this no fates withstand)
      Both for myself and for your father’s land,
      That, when the nuptial bed shall bind the peace,
      (Which I, since you ordain, consent to bless,)
      The laws of either nation be the same;
      But let the Latins still retain their name,
      Speak the same language which they spoke before,
      Wear the same habits which their grandsires wore.
      Call them not Trojans: perish the renown
      And name of Troy, with that detested town.
      Latium be Latium still; let Alba reign
      And Rome’s immortal majesty remain.”

      Then thus the founder of mankind replies
      (Unruffled was his front, serene his eyes)
      “Can Saturn’s issue, and heav’n’s other heir,
      Such endless anger in her bosom bear?
      Be mistress, and your full desires obtain;
      But quench the choler you foment in vain.
      From ancient blood th’ Ausonian people sprung,
      Shall keep their name, their habit, and their tongue.
      The Trojans to their customs shall be tied:
      I will, myself, their common rites provide;
      The natives shall command, the foreigners subside.
      All shall be Latium; Troy without a name;
      And her lost sons forget from whence they came.
      From blood so mix’d, a pious race shall flow,
      Equal to gods, excelling all below.
      No nation more respect to you shall pay,
      Or greater off’rings on your altars lay.”
      Juno consents, well pleas’d that her desires
      Had found success, and from the cloud retires.

      The peace thus made, the Thund’rer next prepares
      To force the wat’ry goddess from the wars.
      Deep in the dismal regions void of light,
      Three daughters at a birth were born to Night:
      These their brown mother, brooding on her care,
      Indued with windy wings to flit in air,
      With serpents girt alike, and crown’d with hissing hair.
      In heav’n the Dirae call’d, and still at hand,
      Before the throne of angry Jove they stand,
      His ministers of wrath, and ready still
      The minds of mortal men with fears to fill,
      Whene’er the moody sire, to wreak his hate
      On realms or towns deserving of their fate,
      Hurls down diseases, death and deadly care,
      And terrifies the guilty world with war.
      One sister plague if these from heav’n he sent,
      To fright Juturna with a dire portent.
      The pest comes whirling down: by far more slow
      Springs the swift arrow from the Parthian bow,
      Or Cydon yew, when, traversing the skies,
      And drench’d in pois’nous juice, the sure destruction flies.
      With such a sudden and unseen a flight
      Shot thro’ the clouds the daughter of the night.
      Soon as the field inclos’d she had in view,
      And from afar her destin’d quarry knew,
      Contracted, to the boding bird she turns,
      Which haunts the ruin’d piles and hallow’d urns,
      And beats about the tombs with nightly wings,
      Where songs obscene on sepulchers she sings.
      Thus lessen’d in her form, with frightful cries
      The Fury round unhappy Turnus flies,
      Flaps on his shield, and flutters o’er his eyes.

      A lazy chillness crept along his blood;
      Chok’d was his voice; his hair with horror stood.
      Juturna from afar beheld her fly,
      And knew th’ ill omen, by her screaming cry
      And stridor of her wings. Amaz’d with fear,
      Her beauteous breast she beat, and rent her flowing hair.

      “Ah me!” she cries, “in this unequal strife
      What can thy sister more to save thy life?
      Weak as I am, can I, alas! contend
      In arms with that inexorable fiend?
      Now, now, I quit the field! forbear to fright
      My tender soul, ye baleful birds of night;
      The lashing of your wings I know too well,
      The sounding flight, and fun’ral screams of hell!
      These are the gifts you bring from haughty Jove,
      The worthy recompense of ravish’d love!
      Did he for this exempt my life from fate?
      O hard conditions of immortal state,
      Tho’ born to death, not privileg’d to die,
      But forc’d to bear impos’d eternity!
      Take back your envious bribes, and let me go
      Companion to my brother’s ghost below!
      The joys are vanish’d: nothing now remains,
      Of life immortal, but immortal pains.
      What earth will open her devouring womb,
      To rest a weary goddess in the tomb!”
      She drew a length of sighs; nor more she said,
      But in her azure mantle wrapp’d her head,
      Then plung’d into her stream, with deep despair,
      And her last sobs came bubbling up in air.

      Now stern Aeneas waves his weighty spear
      Against his foe, and thus upbraids his fear:
      “What farther subterfuge can Turnus find?
      What empty hopes are harbour’d in his mind?
      ’Tis not thy swiftness can secure thy flight;
      Not with their feet, but hands, the valiant fight.
      Vary thy shape in thousand forms, and dare
      What skill and courage can attempt in war;
      Wish for the wings of winds, to mount the sky;
      Or hid, within the hollow earth to lie!”
      The champion shook his head, and made this short reply:
      “No threats of thine my manly mind can move;
      ’Tis hostile heav’n I dread, and partial Jove.”
      He said no more, but, with a sigh, repress’d
      The mighty sorrow in his swelling breast.

      Then, as he roll’d his troubled eyes around,
      An antique stone he saw, the common bound
      Of neighb’ring fields, and barrier of the ground;
      So vast, that twelve strong men of modern days
      Th’ enormous weight from earth could hardly raise.
      He heav’d it at a lift, and, pois’d on high,
      Ran stagg’ring on against his enemy,
      But so disorder’d, that he scarcely knew
      His way, or what unwieldly weight he threw.
      His knocking knees are bent beneath the load,
      And shiv’ring cold congeals his vital blood.
      The stone drops from his arms, and, falling short
      For want of vigour, mocks his vain effort.
      And as, when heavy sleep has clos’d the sight,
      The sickly fancy labours in the night;
      We seem to run; and, destitute of force,
      Our sinking limbs forsake us in the course:
      In vain we heave for breath; in vain we cry;
      The nerves, unbrac’d, their usual strength deny;
      And on the tongue the falt’ring accents die:
      So Turnus far’d; whatever means he tried,
      All force of arms and points of art employ’d,
      The Fury flew athwart, and made th’ endeavor void.

      A thousand various thoughts his soul confound;
      He star’d about, nor aid nor issue found;
      His own men stop the pass, and his own walls surround.
      Once more he pauses, and looks out again,
      And seeks the goddess charioteer in vain.
      Trembling he views the thund’ring chief advance,
      And brandishing aloft the deadly lance:
      Amaz’d he cow’rs beneath his conqu’ring foe,
      Forgets to ward, and waits the coming blow.
      Astonish’d while he stands, and fix’d with fear,
      Aim’d at his shield he sees th’ impending spear.

      The hero measur’d first, with narrow view,
      The destin’d mark; and, rising as he threw,
      With its full swing the fatal weapon flew.
      Not with less rage the rattling thunder falls,
      Or stones from batt’ring-engines break the walls:
      Swift as a whirlwind, from an arm so strong,
      The lance drove on, and bore the death along.
      Naught could his sev’nfold shield the prince avail,
      Nor aught, beneath his arms, the coat of mail:
      It pierc’d thro’ all, and with a grisly wound
      Transfix’d his thigh, and doubled him to ground.
      With groans the Latins rend the vaulted sky:
      Woods, hills, and valleys, to the voice reply.

      Now low on earth the lofty chief is laid,
      With eyes cast upward, and with arms display’d,
      And, recreant, thus to the proud victor pray’d:
      “I know my death deserv’d, nor hope to live:
      Use what the gods and thy good fortune give.
      Yet think, O think, if mercy may be shown,
      Thou hadst a father once, and hast a son.
      Pity my sire, now sinking to the grave;
      And for Anchises’ sake old Daunus save!
      Or, if thy vow’d revenge pursue my death,
      Give to my friends my body void of breath!
      The Latian chiefs have seen me beg my life;
      Thine is the conquest, thine the royal wife:
      Against a yielded man, ’tis mean ignoble strife.”

      In deep suspense the Trojan seem’d to stand,
      And, just prepar’d to strike, repress’d his hand.
      He roll’d his eyes, and ev’ry moment felt
      His manly soul with more compassion melt;
      When, casting down a casual glance, he spied
      The golden belt that glitter’d on his side,
      The fatal spoils which haughty Turnus tore
      From dying Pallas, and in triumph wore.
      Then, rous’d anew to wrath, he loudly cries
      (Flames, while he spoke, came flashing from his eyes)
      “Traitor, dost thou, dost thou to grace pretend,
      Clad, as thou art, in trophies of my friend?
      To his sad soul a grateful off’ring go!
      ’Tis Pallas, Pallas gives this deadly blow.”
      He rais’d his arm aloft, and, at the word,
      Deep in his bosom drove the shining sword.
      The streaming blood distain’d his arms around;
      And the disdainful soul came rushing through the wound.


Midway upon the journey of our life
    I found myself within a forest dark,
    For the straightforward pathway had been lost.

Ah me! how hard a thing it is to say
    What was this forest savage, rough, and stern,
    Which in the very thought renews the fear.

So bitter is it, death is little more;
    But of the good to treat, which there I found,
    Speak will I of the other things I saw there.

I cannot well repeat how there I entered,
    So full was I of slumber at the moment
    In which I had abandoned the true way.

But after I had reached a mountain’s foot,
    At that point where the valley terminated,
    Which had with consternation pierced my heart,

Upward I looked, and I beheld its shoulders,
    Vested already with that planet’s rays
    Which leadeth others right by every road.

Then was the fear a little quieted
    That in my heart’s lake had endured throughout
    The night, which I had passed so piteously.

And even as he, who, with distressful breath,
    Forth issued from the sea upon the shore,
    Turns to the water perilous and gazes;

So did my soul, that still was fleeing onward,
    Turn itself back to re-behold the pass
    Which never yet a living person left.

After my weary body I had rested,
    The way resumed I on the desert slope,
    So that the firm foot ever was the lower.

And lo! almost where the ascent began,
    A panther light and swift exceedingly,
    Which with a spotted skin was covered o’er!

And never moved she from before my face,
    Nay, rather did impede so much my way,
    That many times I to return had turned.

The time was the beginning of the morning,
    And up the sun was mounting with those stars
    That with him were, what time the Love Divine

At first in motion set those beauteous things;
    So were to me occasion of good hope,
    The variegated skin of that wild beast,

The hour of time, and the delicious season;
    But not so much, that did not give me fear
    A lion’s aspect which appeared to me.

He seemed as if against me he were coming
    With head uplifted, and with ravenous hunger,
    So that it seemed the air was afraid of him;

And a she-wolf, that with all hungerings
    Seemed to be laden in her meagreness,
    And many folk has caused to live forlorn!

She brought upon me so much heaviness,
    With the affright that from her aspect came,
    That I the hope relinquished of the height.

And as he is who willingly acquires,
    And the time comes that causes him to lose,
    Who weeps in all his thoughts and is despondent,

E’en such made me that beast withouten peace,
    Which, coming on against me by degrees
    Thrust me back thither where the sun is silent.

While I was rushing downward to the lowland,
    Before mine eyes did one present himself,
    Who seemed from long-continued silence hoarse.

When I beheld him in the desert vast,
    “Have pity on me,” unto him I cried,
    “Whiche’er thou art, or shade or real man!”

He answered me: “Not man; man once I was,
    And both my parents were of Lombardy,
    And Mantuans by country both of them.

‘Sub Julio’ was I born, though it was late,
    And lived at Rome under the good Augustus,
    During the time of false and lying gods.

A poet was I, and I sang that just
    Son of Anchises, who came forth from Troy,
    After that Ilion the superb was burned.

But thou, why goest thou back to such annoyance?
    Why climb’st thou not the Mount Delectable,
    Which is the source and cause of every joy?”

“Now, art thou that Virgilius and that fountain
    Which spreads abroad so wide a river of speech?”
    I made response to him with bashful forehead.

“O, of the other poets honour and light,
    Avail me the long study and great love
    That have impelled me to explore thy volume!

Thou art my master, and my author thou,
    Thou art alone the one from whom I took
    The beautiful style that has done honour to me.

Behold the beast, for which I have turned back;
    Do thou protect me from her, famous Sage,
    For she doth make my veins and pulses tremble.”

“Thee it behoves to take another road,”
    Responded he, when he beheld me weeping,
    “If from this savage place thou wouldst escape;

Because this beast, at which thou criest out,
    Suffers not any one to pass her way,
    But so doth harass him, that she destroys him;

And has a nature so malign and ruthless,
    That never doth she glut her greedy will,
    And after food is hungrier than before.

Many the animals with whom she weds,
    And more they shall be still, until the Greyhound
    Comes, who shall make her perish in her pain.

He shall not feed on either earth or pelf,
    But upon wisdom, and on love and virtue;
    ’Twixt Feltro and Feltro shall his nation be;

Of that low Italy shall he be the saviour,
    On whose account the maid Camilla died,
    Euryalus, Turnus, Nisus, of their wounds;

Through every city shall he hunt her down,
    Until he shall have driven her back to Hell,
    There from whence envy first did let her loose.

Therefore I think and judge it for thy best
    Thou follow me, and I will be thy guide,
    And lead thee hence through the eternal place,

Where thou shalt hear the desperate lamentations,
    Shalt see the ancient spirits disconsolate,
    Who cry out each one for the second death;

And thou shalt see those who contented are
    Within the fire, because they hope to come,
    Whene’er it may be, to the blessed people;

To whom, then, if thou wishest to ascend,
    A soul shall be for that than I more worthy;
    With her at my departure I will leave thee;

Because that Emperor, who reigns above,
    In that I was rebellious to his law,
    Wills that through me none come into his city.

He governs everywhere, and there he reigns;
    There is his city and his lofty throne;
    O happy he whom thereto he elects!”

And I to him: “Poet, I thee entreat,
    By that same God whom thou didst never know,
    So that I may escape this woe and worse,

Thou wouldst conduct me there where thou hast said,
    That I may see the portal of Saint Peter,
    And those thou makest so disconsolate.”

Then he moved on, and I behind him followed.






Day was departing, and the embrowned air
    Released the animals that are on earth
    From their fatigues; and I the only one

Made myself ready to sustain the war,
    Both of the way and likewise of the woe,
    Which memory that errs not shall retrace.

O Muses, O high genius, now assist me!
    O memory, that didst write down what I saw,
    Here thy nobility shall be manifest!

And I began: “Poet, who guidest me,
    Regard my manhood, if it be sufficient,
    Ere to the arduous pass thou dost confide me.

Thou sayest, that of Silvius the parent,
    While yet corruptible, unto the world
    Immortal went, and was there bodily.

But if the adversary of all evil
    Was courteous, thinking of the high effect
    That issue would from him, and who, and what,

To men of intellect unmeet it seems not;
    For he was of great Rome, and of her empire
    In the empyreal heaven as father chosen;

The which and what, wishing to speak the truth,
    Were stablished as the holy place, wherein
    Sits the successor of the greatest Peter.

Upon this journey, whence thou givest him vaunt,
    Things did he hear, which the occasion were
    Both of his victory and the papal mantle.

Thither went afterwards the Chosen Vessel,
    To bring back comfort thence unto that Faith,
    Which of salvation’s way is the beginning.

But I, why thither come, or who concedes it?
    I not Aeneas am, I am not Paul,
    Nor I, nor others, think me worthy of it.

Therefore, if I resign myself to come,
    I fear the coming may be ill-advised;
    Thou’rt wise, and knowest better than I speak.”

And as he is, who unwills what he willed,
    And by new thoughts doth his intention change,
    So that from his design he quite withdraws,

Such I became, upon that dark hillside,
    Because, in thinking, I consumed the emprise,
    Which was so very prompt in the beginning.

“If I have well thy language understood,”
    Replied that shade of the Magnanimous,
    “Thy soul attainted is with cowardice,

Which many times a man encumbers so,
    It turns him back from honoured enterprise,
    As false sight doth a beast, when he is shy.

That thou mayst free thee from this apprehension,
    I’ll tell thee why I came, and what I heard
    At the first moment when I grieved for thee.

Among those was I who are in suspense,
    And a fair, saintly Lady called to me
    In such wise, I besought her to command me.

Her eyes where shining brighter than the Star;
    And she began to say, gentle and low,
    With voice angelical, in her own language:

‘O spirit courteous of Mantua,
    Of whom the fame still in the world endures,
    And shall endure, long-lasting as the world;

A friend of mine, and not the friend of fortune,
    Upon the desert slope is so impeded
    Upon his way, that he has turned through terror,

And may, I fear, already be so lost,
    That I too late have risen to his succour,
    From that which I have heard of him in Heaven.

Bestir thee now, and with thy speech ornate,
    And with what needful is for his release,
    Assist him so, that I may be consoled.

Beatrice am I, who do bid thee go;
    I come from there, where I would fain return;
    Love moved me, which compelleth me to speak.

When I shall be in presence of my Lord,
    Full often will I praise thee unto him.’
    Then paused she, and thereafter I began:

‘O Lady of virtue, thou alone through whom
    The human race exceedeth all contained
    Within the heaven that has the lesser circles,

So grateful unto me is thy commandment,
    To obey, if ’twere already done, were late;
    No farther need’st thou ope to me thy wish.

But the cause tell me why thou dost not shun
    The here descending down into this centre,
    From the vast place thou burnest to return to.’

‘Since thou wouldst fain so inwardly discern,
    Briefly will I relate,’ she answered me,
    ‘Why I am not afraid to enter here.

Of those things only should one be afraid
    Which have the power of doing others harm;
    Of the rest, no; because they are not fearful.

God in his mercy such created me
    That misery of yours attains me not,
    Nor any flame assails me of this burning.

A gentle Lady is in Heaven, who grieves
    At this impediment, to which I send thee,
    So that stern judgment there above is broken.

In her entreaty she besought Lucia,
    And said, “Thy faithful one now stands in need
    Of thee, and unto thee I recommend him.”

Lucia, foe of all that cruel is,
    Hastened away, and came unto the place
    Where I was sitting with the ancient Rachel.

“Beatrice” said she, “the true praise of God,
    Why succourest thou not him, who loved thee so,
    For thee he issued from the vulgar herd?

Dost thou not hear the pity of his plaint?
    Dost thou not see the death that combats him
    Beside that flood, where ocean has no vaunt?”

Never were persons in the world so swift
    To work their weal and to escape their woe,
    As I, after such words as these were uttered,

Came hither downward from my blessed seat,
    Confiding in thy dignified discourse,
    Which honours thee, and those who’ve listened to it.’

After she thus had spoken unto me,
    Weeping, her shining eyes she turned away;
    Whereby she made me swifter in my coming;

And unto thee I came, as she desired;
    I have delivered thee from that wild beast,
    Which barred the beautiful mountain’s short ascent.

What is it, then?  Why, why dost thou delay?
    Why is such baseness bedded in thy heart?
    Daring and hardihood why hast thou not,

Seeing that three such Ladies benedight
    Are caring for thee in the court of Heaven,
    And so much good my speech doth promise thee?”

Even as the flowerets, by nocturnal chill,
    Bowed down and closed, when the sun whitens them,
    Uplift themselves all open on their stems;

Such I became with my exhausted strength,
    And such good courage to my heart there coursed,
    That I began, like an intrepid person:

“O she compassionate, who succoured me,
    And courteous thou, who hast obeyed so soon
    The words of truth which she addressed to thee!

Thou hast my heart so with desire disposed
    To the adventure, with these words of thine,
    That to my first intent I have returned.

Now go, for one sole will is in us both,
    Thou Leader, and thou Lord, and Master thou.”
    Thus said I to him; and when he had moved,

I entered on the deep and savage way.







“Through me the way is to the city dolent;
    Through me the way is to eternal dole;
    Through me the way among the people lost.

Justice incited my sublime Creator;
    Created me divine Omnipotence,
    The highest Wisdom and the primal Love.

Before me there were no created things,
    Only eterne, and I eternal last.
    All hope abandon, ye who enter in!”

These words in sombre colour I beheld
    Written upon the summit of a gate;
    Whence I: “Their sense is, Master, hard to me!”

And he to me, as one experienced:
    “Here all suspicion needs must be abandoned,
    All cowardice must needs be here extinct.

We to the place have come, where I have told thee
    Thou shalt behold the people dolorous
    Who have foregone the good of intellect.”

And after he had laid his hand on mine
    With joyful mien, whence I was comforted,
    He led me in among the secret things.

There sighs, complaints, and ululations loud
    Resounded through the air without a star,
    Whence I, at the beginning, wept thereat.

Languages diverse, horrible dialects,
    Accents of anger, words of agony,
    And voices high and hoarse, with sound of hands,

Made up a tumult that goes whirling on
    For ever in that air for ever black,
    Even as the sand doth, when the whirlwind breathes.

And I, who had my head with horror bound,
    Said: “Master, what is this which now I hear?
    What folk is this, which seems by pain so vanquished?”

And he to me: “This miserable mode
    Maintain the melancholy souls of those
    Who lived withouten infamy or praise.

Commingled are they with that caitiff choir
    Of Angels, who have not rebellious been,
    Nor faithful were to God, but were for self.

The heavens expelled them, not to be less fair;
    Nor them the nethermore abyss receives,
    For glory none the damned would have from them.”

And I: “O Master, what so grievous is
    To these, that maketh them lament so sore?”
    He answered: “I will tell thee very briefly.

These have no longer any hope of death;
    And this blind life of theirs is so debased,
    They envious are of every other fate.

No fame of them the world permits to be;
    Misericord and Justice both disdain them.
    Let us not speak of them, but look, and pass.”

And I, who looked again, beheld a banner,
    Which, whirling round, ran on so rapidly,
    That of all pause it seemed to me indignant;

And after it there came so long a train
    Of people, that I ne’er would have believed
    That ever Death so many had undone.

When some among them I had recognised,
    I looked, and I beheld the shade of him
    Who made through cowardice the great refusal.

Forthwith I comprehended, and was certain,
    That this the sect was of the caitiff wretches
    Hateful to God and to his enemies.

These miscreants, who never were alive,
    Were naked, and were stung exceedingly
    By gadflies and by hornets that were there.

These did their faces irrigate with blood,
    Which, with their tears commingled, at their feet
    By the disgusting worms was gathered up.

And when to gazing farther I betook me.
    People I saw on a great river’s bank;
    Whence said I: “Master, now vouchsafe to me,

That I may know who these are, and what law
    Makes them appear so ready to pass over,
    As I discern athwart the dusky light.”

And he to me: “These things shall all be known
    To thee, as soon as we our footsteps stay
    Upon the dismal shore of Acheron.”

Then with mine eyes ashamed and downward cast,
    Fearing my words might irksome be to him,
    From speech refrained I till we reached the river.

And lo! towards us coming in a boat
    An old man, hoary with the hair of eld,
    Crying: “Woe unto you, ye souls depraved!

Hope nevermore to look upon the heavens;
    I come to lead you to the other shore,
    To the eternal shades in heat and frost.

And thou, that yonder standest, living soul,
    Withdraw thee from these people, who are dead!”
    But when he saw that I did not withdraw,

He said: “By other ways, by other ports
    Thou to the shore shalt come, not here, for passage;
    A lighter vessel needs must carry thee.”

And unto him the Guide: “Vex thee not, Charon;
    It is so willed there where is power to do
    That which is willed; and farther question not.”

Thereat were quieted the fleecy cheeks
    Of him the ferryman of the livid fen,
    Who round about his eyes had wheels of flame.

But all those souls who weary were and naked
    Their colour changed and gnashed their teeth together,
    As soon as they had heard those cruel words.

God they blasphemed and their progenitors,
    The human race, the place, the time, the seed
    Of their engendering and of their birth!

Thereafter all together they drew back,
    Bitterly weeping, to the accursed shore,
    Which waiteth every man who fears not God.

Charon the demon, with the eyes of glede,
    Beckoning to them, collects them all together,
    Beats with his oar whoever lags behind.

As in the autumn-time the leaves fall off,
    First one and then another, till the branch
    Unto the earth surrenders all its spoils;

In similar wise the evil seed of Adam
    Throw themselves from that margin one by one,
    At signals, as a bird unto its lure.

So they depart across the dusky wave,
    And ere upon the other side they land,
    Again on this side a new troop assembles.

“My son,” the courteous Master said to me,
    “All those who perish in the wrath of God
    Here meet together out of every land;

And ready are they to pass o’er the river,
    Because celestial Justice spurs them on,
    So that their fear is turned into desire.

This way there never passes a good soul;
    And hence if Charon doth complain of thee,
    Well mayst thou know now what his speech imports.”

This being finished, all the dusk champaign
    Trembled so violently, that of that terror
    The recollection bathes me still with sweat.

The land of tears gave forth a blast of wind,
    And fulminated a vermilion light,
    Which overmastered in me every sense,

And as a man whom sleep hath seized I fell.






Broke the deep lethargy within my head
    A heavy thunder, so that I upstarted,
    Like to a person who by force is wakened;

And round about I moved my rested eyes,
    Uprisen erect, and steadfastly I gazed,
    To recognise the place wherein I was.

True is it, that upon the verge I found me
    Of the abysmal valley dolorous,
    That gathers thunder of infinite ululations.

Obscure, profound it was, and nebulous,
    So that by fixing on its depths my sight
    Nothing whatever I discerned therein.

“Let us descend now into the blind world,”
    Began the Poet, pallid utterly;
    “I will be first, and thou shalt second be.”

And I, who of his colour was aware,
    Said: “How shall I come, if thou art afraid,
    Who’rt wont to be a comfort to my fears?”

And he to me: “The anguish of the people
    Who are below here in my face depicts
    That pity which for terror thou hast taken.

Let us go on, for the long way impels us.”
    Thus he went in, and thus he made me enter
    The foremost circle that surrounds the abyss.

There, as it seemed to me from listening,
    Were lamentations none, but only sighs,
    That tremble made the everlasting air.

And this arose from sorrow without torment,
    Which the crowds had, that many were and great,
    Of infants and of women and of men.

To me the Master good: “Thou dost not ask
    What spirits these, which thou beholdest, are?
    Now will I have thee know, ere thou go farther,

That they sinned not; and if they merit had,
    ’Tis not enough, because they had not baptism
    Which is the portal of the Faith thou holdest;

And if they were before Christianity,
    In the right manner they adored not God;
    And among such as these am I myself.

For such defects, and not for other guilt,
    Lost are we and are only so far punished,
    That without hope we live on in desire.”

Great grief seized on my heart when this I heard,
    Because some people of much worthiness
    I knew, who in that Limbo were suspended.

“Tell me, my Master, tell me, thou my Lord,”
    Began I, with desire of being certain
    Of that Faith which o’ercometh every error,

“Came any one by his own merit hence,
    Or by another’s, who was blessed thereafter?”
    And he, who understood my covert speech,

Replied: “I was a novice in this state,
    When I saw hither come a Mighty One,
    With sign of victory incoronate.

Hence he drew forth the shade of the First Parent,
    And that of his son Abel, and of Noah,
    Of Moses the lawgiver, and the obedient

Abraham, patriarch, and David, king,
    Israel with his father and his children,
    And Rachel, for whose sake he did so much,

And others many, and he made them blessed;
    And thou must know, that earlier than these
    Never were any human spirits saved.”

We ceased not to advance because he spake,
    But still were passing onward through the forest,
    The forest, say I, of thick-crowded ghosts.

Not very far as yet our way had gone
    This side the summit, when I saw a fire
    That overcame a hemisphere of darkness.

We were a little distant from it still,
    But not so far that I in part discerned not
    That honourable people held that place.

“O thou who honourest every art and science,
    Who may these be, which such great honour have,
    That from the fashion of the rest it parts them?”

And he to me: “The honourable name,
    That sounds of them above there in thy life,
    Wins grace in Heaven, that so advances them.”

In the mean time a voice was heard by me:
    “All honour be to the pre-eminent Poet;
    His shade returns again, that was departed.”

After the voice had ceased and quiet was,
    Four mighty shades I saw approaching us;
    Semblance had they nor sorrowful nor glad.

To say to me began my gracious Master:
    “Him with that falchion in his hand behold,
    Who comes before the three, even as their lord.

That one is Homer, Poet sovereign;
    He who comes next is Horace, the satirist;
    The third is Ovid, and the last is Lucan.

Because to each of these with me applies
    The name that solitary voice proclaimed,
    They do me honour, and in that do well.”

Thus I beheld assemble the fair school
    Of that lord of the song pre-eminent,
    Who o’er the others like an eagle soars.

When they together had discoursed somewhat,
    They turned to me with signs of salutation,
    And on beholding this, my Master smiled;

And more of honour still, much more, they did me,
    In that they made me one of their own band;
    So that the sixth was I, ’mid so much wit.

Thus we went on as far as to the light,
    Things saying ’tis becoming to keep silent,
    As was the saying of them where I was.

We came unto a noble castle’s foot,
    Seven times encompassed with lofty walls,
    Defended round by a fair rivulet;

This we passed over even as firm ground;
    Through portals seven I entered with these Sages;
    We came into a meadow of fresh verdure.

People were there with solemn eyes and slow,
    Of great authority in their countenance;
    They spake but seldom, and with gentle voices.

Thus we withdrew ourselves upon one side
    Into an opening luminous and lofty,
    So that they all of them were visible.

There opposite, upon the green enamel,
    Were pointed out to me the mighty spirits,
    Whom to have seen I feel myself exalted.

I saw Electra with companions many,
    ’Mongst whom I knew both Hector and Aeneas,
    Caesar in armour with gerfalcon eyes;

I saw Camilla and Penthesilea
    On the other side, and saw the King Latinus,
    Who with Lavinia his daughter sat;

I saw that Brutus who drove Tarquin forth,
    Lucretia, Julia, Marcia, and Cornelia,
    And saw alone, apart, the Saladin.

When I had lifted up my brows a little,
    The Master I beheld of those who know,
    Sit with his philosophic family.

All gaze upon him, and all do him honour.
    There I beheld both Socrates and Plato,
    Who nearer him before the others stand;

Democritus, who puts the world on chance,
    Diogenes, Anaxagoras, and Thales,
    Zeno, Empedocles, and Heraclitus;

Of qualities I saw the good collector,
    Hight Dioscorides; and Orpheus saw I,
    Tully and Livy, and moral Seneca,

Euclid, geometrician, and Ptolemy,
    Galen, Hippocrates, and Avicenna,
    Averroes, who the great Comment made.

I cannot all of them pourtray in full,
    Because so drives me onward the long theme,
    That many times the word comes short of fact.

The sixfold company in two divides;
    Another way my sapient Guide conducts me
    Forth from the quiet to the air that trembles;

And to a place I come where nothing shines.






Thus I descended out of the first circle
    Down to the second, that less space begirds,
    And so much greater dole, that goads to wailing.

There standeth Minos horribly, and snarls;
    Examines the transgressions at the entrance;
    Judges, and sends according as he girds him.

I say, that when the spirit evil-born
    Cometh before him, wholly it confesses;
    And this discriminator of transgressions

Seeth what place in Hell is meet for it;
    Girds himself with his tail as many times
    As grades he wishes it should be thrust down.

Always before him many of them stand;
    They go by turns each one unto the judgment;
    They speak, and hear, and then are downward hurled.

“O thou, that to this dolorous hostelry
    Comest,” said Minos to me, when he saw me,
    Leaving the practice of so great an office,

“Look how thou enterest, and in whom thou trustest;
    Let not the portal’s amplitude deceive thee.”
    And unto him my Guide: “Why criest thou too?

Do not impede his journey fate-ordained;
    It is so willed there where is power to do
    That which is willed; and ask no further question.”

And now begin the dolesome notes to grow
    Audible unto me; now am I come
    There where much lamentation strikes upon me.

I came into a place mute of all light,
    Which bellows as the sea does in a tempest,
    If by opposing winds ’t is combated.

The infernal hurricane that never rests
    Hurtles the spirits onward in its rapine;
    Whirling them round, and smiting, it molests them.

When they arrive before the precipice,
    There are the shrieks, the plaints, and the laments,
    There they blaspheme the puissance divine.

I understood that unto such a torment
    The carnal malefactors were condemned,
    Who reason subjugate to appetite.

And as the wings of starlings bear them on
    In the cold season in large band and full,
    So doth that blast the spirits maledict;

It hither, thither, downward, upward, drives them;
    No hope doth comfort them for evermore,
    Not of repose, but even of lesser pain.

And as the cranes go chanting forth their lays,
    Making in air a long line of themselves,
    So saw I coming, uttering lamentations,

Shadows borne onward by the aforesaid stress.
    Whereupon said I: “Master, who are those
    People, whom the black air so castigates?”

“The first of those, of whom intelligence
    Thou fain wouldst have,” then said he unto me,
    “The empress was of many languages.

To sensual vices she was so abandoned,
    That lustful she made licit in her law,
    To remove the blame to which she had been led.

She is Semiramis, of whom we read
    That she succeeded Ninus, and was his spouse;
    She held the land which now the Sultan rules.

The next is she who killed herself for love,
    And broke faith with the ashes of Sichaeus;
    Then Cleopatra the voluptuous.”

Helen I saw, for whom so many ruthless
    Seasons revolved; and saw the great Achilles,
    Who at the last hour combated with Love.

Paris I saw, Tristan; and more than a thousand
    Shades did he name and point out with his finger,
    Whom Love had separated from our life.

After that I had listened to my Teacher,
    Naming the dames of eld and cavaliers,
    Pity prevailed, and I was nigh bewildered.

And I began: “O Poet, willingly
    Speak would I to those two, who go together,
    And seem upon the wind to be so light.”

And, he to me: “Thou’lt mark, when they shall be
    Nearer to us; and then do thou implore them
    By love which leadeth them, and they will come.”

Soon as the wind in our direction sways them,
    My voice uplift I: “O ye weary souls!
    Come speak to us, if no one interdicts it.”

As turtle-doves, called onward by desire,
    With open and steady wings to the sweet nest
    Fly through the air by their volition borne,

So came they from the band where Dido is,
    Approaching us athwart the air malign,
    So strong was the affectionate appeal.

“O living creature gracious and benignant,
    Who visiting goest through the purple air
    Us, who have stained the world incarnadine,

If were the King of the Universe our friend,
    We would pray unto him to give thee peace,
    Since thou hast pity on our woe perverse.

Of what it pleases thee to hear and speak,
    That will we hear, and we will speak to you,
    While silent is the wind, as it is now.

Sitteth the city, wherein I was born,
    Upon the sea-shore where the Po descends
    To rest in peace with all his retinue.

Love, that on gentle heart doth swiftly seize,
    Seized this man for the person beautiful
    That was ta’en from me, and still the mode offends me.

Love, that exempts no one beloved from loving,
    Seized me with pleasure of this man so strongly,
    That, as thou seest, it doth not yet desert me;

Love has conducted us unto one death;
    Caina waiteth him who quenched our life!”
    These words were borne along from them to us.

As soon as I had heard those souls tormented,
    I bowed my face, and so long held it down
    Until the Poet said to me: “What thinkest?”

When I made answer, I began: “Alas!
    How many pleasant thoughts, how much desire,
    Conducted these unto the dolorous pass!”

Then unto them I turned me, and I spake,
    And I began: “Thine agonies, Francesca,
    Sad and compassionate to weeping make me.

But tell me, at the time of those sweet sighs,
    By what and in what manner Love conceded,
    That you should know your dubious desires?”

And she to me: “There is no greater sorrow
    Than to be mindful of the happy time
    In misery, and that thy Teacher knows.

But, if to recognise the earliest root
    Of love in us thou hast so great desire,
    I will do even as he who weeps and speaks.

One day we reading were for our delight
    Of Launcelot, how Love did him enthral.
    Alone we were and without any fear.

Full many a time our eyes together drew
    That reading, and drove the colour from our faces;
    But one point only was it that o’ercame us.

When as we read of the much-longed-for smile
    Being by such a noble lover kissed,
    This one, who ne’er from me shall be divided,

Kissed me upon the mouth all palpitating.
    Galeotto was the book and he who wrote it.
    That day no farther did we read therein.”

And all the while one spirit uttered this,
    The other one did weep so, that, for pity,
    I swooned away as if I had been dying,

And fell, even as a dead body falls.







At the return of consciousness, that closed
    Before the pity of those two relations,
    Which utterly with sadness had confused me,

New torments I behold, and new tormented
    Around me, whichsoever way I move,
    And whichsoever way I turn, and gaze.

In the third circle am I of the rain
    Eternal, maledict, and cold, and heavy;
    Its law and quality are never new.

Huge hail, and water sombre-hued, and snow,
    Athwart the tenebrous air pour down amain;
    Noisome the earth is, that receiveth this.

Cerberus, monster cruel and uncouth,
    With his three gullets like a dog is barking
    Over the people that are there submerged.

Red eyes he has, and unctuous beard and black,
    And belly large, and armed with claws his hands;
    He rends the spirits, flays, and quarters them.

Howl the rain maketh them like unto dogs;
    One side they make a shelter for the other;
    Oft turn themselves the wretched reprobates.

When Cerberus perceived us, the great worm!
     His mouths he opened, and displayed his tusks;
     Not a limb had he that was motionless.

And my Conductor, with his spans extended,
    Took of the earth, and with his fists well filled,
    He threw it into those rapacious gullets.

Such as that dog is, who by barking craves,
    And quiet grows soon as his food he gnaws,
    For to devour it he but thinks and struggles,

The like became those muzzles filth-begrimed
    Of Cerberus the demon, who so thunders
    Over the souls that they would fain be deaf.

We passed across the shadows, which subdues
    The heavy rain-storm, and we placed our feet
    Upon their vanity that person seems.

They all were lying prone upon the earth,
    Excepting one, who sat upright as soon
    As he beheld us passing on before him.

“O thou that art conducted through this Hell,”
    He said to me, “recall me, if thou canst;
    Thyself wast made before I was unmade.”

And I to him: “The anguish which thou hast
    Perhaps doth draw thee out of my remembrance,
    So that it seems not I have ever seen thee.

But tell me who thou art, that in so doleful
    A place art put, and in such punishment,
    If some are greater, none is so displeasing.”

And he to me: “Thy city, which is full
    Of envy so that now the sack runs over,
    Held me within it in the life serene.

You citizens were wont to call me Ciacco;
    For the pernicious sin of gluttony
    I, as thou seest, am battered by this rain.

And I, sad soul, am not the only one,
    For all these suffer the like penalty
    For the like sin;” and word no more spake he.

I answered him: “Ciacco, thy wretchedness
    Weighs on me so that it to weep invites me;
    But tell me, if thou knowest, to what shall come

The citizens of the divided city;
    If any there be just; and the occasion
    Tell me why so much discord has assailed it.”

And he to me: “They, after long contention,
    Will come to bloodshed; and the rustic party
    Will drive the other out with much offence.

Then afterwards behoves it this one fall
    Within three suns, and rise again the other
    By force of him who now is on the coast.

High will it hold its forehead a long while,
    Keeping the other under heavy burdens,
    Howe’er it weeps thereat and is indignant.

The just are two, and are not understood there;
    Envy and Arrogance and Avarice
    Are the three sparks that have all hearts enkindled.”

Here ended he his tearful utterance;
    And I to him: “I wish thee still to teach me,
    And make a gift to me of further speech.

Farinata and Tegghiaio, once so worthy,
    Jacopo Rusticucci, Arrigo, and Mosca,
    And others who on good deeds set their thoughts,

Say where they are, and cause that I may know them;
    For great desire constraineth me to learn
    If Heaven doth sweeten them, or Hell envenom.”

And he: “They are among the blacker souls;
    A different sin downweighs them to the bottom;
    If thou so far descendest, thou canst see them.

But when thou art again in the sweet world,
    I pray thee to the mind of others bring me;
    No more I tell thee and no more I answer.”

Then his straightforward eyes he turned askance,
    Eyed me a little, and then bowed his head;
    He fell therewith prone like the other blind.

And the Guide said to me: “He wakes no more
    This side the sound of the angelic trumpet;
    When shall approach the hostile Potentate,

Each one shall find again his dismal tomb,
    Shall reassume his flesh and his own figure,
    Shall hear what through eternity re-echoes.”

So we passed onward o’er the filthy mixture
    Of shadows and of rain with footsteps slow,
    Touching a little on the future life.

Wherefore I said: “Master, these torments here,
    Will they increase after the mighty sentence,
    Or lesser be, or will they be as burning?”

And he to me: “Return unto thy science,
    Which wills, that as the thing more perfect is,
    The more it feels of pleasure and of pain.

Albeit that this people maledict
    To true perfection never can attain,
    Hereafter more than now they look to be.”

Round in a circle by that road we went,
    Speaking much more, which I do not repeat;
    We came unto the point where the descent is;

There we found Plutus the great enemy.







“Pape Satan, Pape Satan, Aleppe!”
    Thus Plutus with his clucking voice began;
    And that benignant Sage, who all things knew,

Said, to encourage me: “Let not thy fear
    Harm thee; for any power that he may have
    Shall not prevent thy going down this crag.”

Then he turned round unto that bloated lip,
    And said: “Be silent, thou accursed wolf;
    Consume within thyself with thine own rage.

Not causeless is this journey to the abyss;
    Thus is it willed on high, where Michael wrought
    Vengeance upon the proud adultery.”

Even as the sails inflated by the wind
    Involved together fall when snaps the mast,
    So fell the cruel monster to the earth.

Thus we descended into the fourth chasm,
    Gaining still farther on the dolesome shore
    Which all the woe of the universe insacks.

Justice of God, ah! who heaps up so many
    New toils and sufferings as I beheld?
    And why doth our transgression waste us so?

As doth the billow there upon Charybdis,
    That breaks itself on that which it encounters,
    So here the folk must dance their roundelay.

Here saw I people, more than elsewhere, many,
    On one side and the other, with great howls,
    Rolling weights forward by main force of chest.

They clashed together, and then at that point
    Each one turned backward, rolling retrograde,
    Crying, “Why keepest?” and, “Why squanderest thou?”

Thus they returned along the lurid circle
    On either hand unto the opposite point,
    Shouting their shameful metre evermore.

Then each, when he arrived there, wheeled about
    Through his half-circle to another joust;
    And I, who had my heart pierced as it were,

Exclaimed: “My Master, now declare to me
    What people these are, and if all were clerks,
    These shaven crowns upon the left of us.”

And he to me: “All of them were asquint
    In intellect in the first life, so much
    That there with measure they no spending made.

Clearly enough their voices bark it forth,
    Whene’er they reach the two points of the circle,
    Where sunders them the opposite defect.

Clerks those were who no hairy covering
    Have on the head, and Popes and Cardinals,
    In whom doth Avarice practise its excess.”

And I: “My Master, among such as these
    I ought forsooth to recognise some few,
    Who were infected with these maladies.”

And he to me: “Vain thought thou entertainest;
    The undiscerning life which made them sordid
    Now makes them unto all discernment dim.

Forever shall they come to these two buttings;
    These from the sepulchre shall rise again
    With the fist closed, and these with tresses shorn.

Ill giving and ill keeping the fair world
    Have ta’en from them, and placed them in this scuffle;
    Whate’er it be, no words adorn I for it.

Now canst thou, Son, behold the transient farce
    Of goods that are committed unto Fortune,
    For which the human race each other buffet;

For all the gold that is beneath the moon,
    Or ever has been, of these weary souls
    Could never make a single one repose.”

“Master,” I said to him, “now tell me also
    What is this Fortune which thou speakest of,
    That has the world’s goods so within its clutches?”

And he to me: “O creatures imbecile,
    What ignorance is this which doth beset you?
    Now will I have thee learn my judgment of her.

He whose omniscience everything transcends
    The heavens created, and gave who should guide them,
    That every part to every part may shine,

Distributing the light in equal measure;
    He in like manner to the mundane splendours
    Ordained a general ministress and guide,

That she might change at times the empty treasures
    From race to race, from one blood to another,
    Beyond resistance of all human wisdom.

Therefore one people triumphs, and another
    Languishes, in pursuance of her judgment,
    Which hidden is, as in the grass a serpent.

Your knowledge has no counterstand against her;
    She makes provision, judges, and pursues
    Her governance, as theirs the other gods.

Her permutations have not any truce;
    Necessity makes her precipitate,
    So often cometh who his turn obtains.

And this is she who is so crucified
    Even by those who ought to give her praise,
    Giving her blame amiss, and bad repute.

But she is blissful, and she hears it not;
    Among the other primal creatures gladsome
    She turns her sphere, and blissful she rejoices.

Let us descend now unto greater woe;
    Already sinks each star that was ascending
    When I set out, and loitering is forbidden.”

We crossed the circle to the other bank,
    Near to a fount that boils, and pours itself
    Along a gully that runs out of it.

The water was more sombre far than perse;
    And we, in company with the dusky waves,
    Made entrance downward by a path uncouth.

A marsh it makes, which has the name of Styx,
    This tristful brooklet, when it has descended
    Down to the foot of the malign gray shores.

And I, who stood intent upon beholding,
    Saw people mud-besprent in that lagoon,
    All of them naked and with angry look.

They smote each other not alone with hands,
    But with the head and with the breast and feet,
    Tearing each other piecemeal with their teeth.

Said the good Master: “Son, thou now beholdest
    The souls of those whom anger overcame;
    And likewise I would have thee know for certain

Beneath the water people are who sigh
    And make this water bubble at the surface,
    As the eye tells thee wheresoe’er it turns.

Fixed in the mire they say, ‘We sullen were
    In the sweet air, which by the sun is gladdened,
    Bearing within ourselves the sluggish reek;

Now we are sullen in this sable mire.’
    This hymn do they keep gurgling in their throats,
    For with unbroken words they cannot say it.”

Thus we went circling round the filthy fen
    A great arc ’twixt the dry bank and the swamp,
    With eyes turned unto those who gorge the mire;

Unto the foot of a tower we came at last.







I say, continuing, that long before
    We to the foot of that high tower had come,
    Our eyes went upward to the summit of it,

By reason of two flamelets we saw placed there,
    And from afar another answer them,
    So far, that hardly could the eye attain it.

And, to the sea of all discernment turned,
    I said: “What sayeth this, and what respondeth
    That other fire? and who are they that made it?”

And he to me: “Across the turbid waves
    What is expected thou canst now discern,
    If reek of the morass conceal it not.”

Cord never shot an arrow from itself
    That sped away athwart the air so swift,
    As I beheld a very little boat

Come o’er the water tow’rds us at that moment,
    Under the guidance of a single pilot,
    Who shouted, “Now art thou arrived, fell soul?”

“Phlegyas, Phlegyas, thou criest out in vain
    For this once,” said my Lord; “thou shalt not have us
    Longer than in the passing of the slough.”

As he who listens to some great deceit
    That has been done to him, and then resents it,
    Such became Phlegyas, in his gathered wrath.

My Guide descended down into the boat,
    And then he made me enter after him,
    And only when I entered seemed it laden.

Soon as the Guide and I were in the boat,
    The antique prow goes on its way, dividing
    More of the water than ’tis wont with others.

While we were running through the dead canal,
    Uprose in front of me one full of mire,
    And said, “Who ’rt thou that comest ere the hour?”

And I to him: “Although I come, I stay not;
    But who art thou that hast become so squalid?”
    “Thou seest that I am one who weeps,” he answered.

And I to him: “With weeping and with wailing,
    Thou spirit maledict, do thou remain;
    For thee I know, though thou art all defiled.”

Then stretched he both his hands unto the boat;
    Whereat my wary Master thrust him back,
    Saying, “Away there with the other dogs!”

Thereafter with his arms he clasped my neck;
    He kissed my face, and said: “Disdainful soul,
    Blessed be she who bore thee in her bosom.

That was an arrogant person in the world;
    Goodness is none, that decks his memory;
    So likewise here his shade is furious.

How many are esteemed great kings up there,
    Who here shall be like unto swine in mire,
    Leaving behind them horrible dispraises!”

And I: “My Master, much should I be pleased,
    If I could see him soused into this broth,
    Before we issue forth out of the lake.”

And he to me: “Ere unto thee the shore
    Reveal itself, thou shalt be satisfied;
    Such a desire ’tis meet thou shouldst enjoy.”

A little after that, I saw such havoc
    Made of him by the people of the mire,
    That still I praise and thank my God for it.

They all were shouting, “At Philippo Argenti!”
    And that exasperate spirit Florentine
    Turned round upon himself with his own teeth.

We left him there, and more of him I tell not;
    But on mine ears there smote a lamentation,
    Whence forward I intent unbar mine eyes.

And the good Master said: “Even now, my Son,
    The city draweth near whose name is Dis,
    With the grave citizens, with the great throng.”

And I: “Its mosques already, Master, clearly
    Within there in the valley I discern
    Vermilion, as if issuing from the fire

They were.”  And he to me: “The fire eternal
    That kindles them within makes them look red,
    As thou beholdest in this nether Hell.”

Then we arrived within the moats profound,
    That circumvallate that disconsolate city;
    The walls appeared to me to be of iron.

Not without making first a circuit wide,
    We came unto a place where loud the pilot
    Cried out to us, “Debark, here is the entrance.”

More than a thousand at the gates I saw
    Out of the Heavens rained down, who angrily
    Were saying, “Who is this that without death

Goes through the kingdom of the people dead?”
    And my sagacious Master made a sign
    Of wishing secretly to speak with them.

A little then they quelled their great disdain,
    And said: “Come thou alone, and he begone
    Who has so boldly entered these dominions.

Let him return alone by his mad road;
    Try, if he can; for thou shalt here remain,
    Who hast escorted him through such dark regions.”

Think, Reader, if I was discomforted
    At utterance of the accursed words;
    For never to return here I believed.

“O my dear Guide, who more than seven times
    Hast rendered me security, and drawn me
    From imminent peril that before me stood,

Do not desert me,” said I, “thus undone;
    And if the going farther be denied us,
    Let us retrace our steps together swiftly.”

And that Lord, who had led me thitherward,
    Said unto me: “Fear not; because our passage
    None can take from us, it by Such is given.

But here await me, and thy weary spirit
    Comfort and nourish with a better hope;
    For in this nether world I will not leave thee.”

So onward goes and there abandons me
    My Father sweet, and I remain in doubt,
    For No and Yes within my head contend.

I could not hear what he proposed to them;
    But with them there he did not linger long,
    Ere each within in rivalry ran back.

They closed the portals, those our adversaries,
    On my Lord’s breast, who had remained without
    And turned to me with footsteps far between.

His eyes cast down, his forehead shorn had he
    Of all its boldness, and he said, with sighs,
    “Who has denied to me the dolesome houses?”

And unto me: “Thou, because I am angry,
    Fear not, for I will conquer in the trial,
    Whatever for defence within be planned.

This arrogance of theirs is nothing new;
    For once they used it at less secret gate,
    Which finds itself without a fastening still.

O’er it didst thou behold the dead inscription;
    And now this side of it descends the steep,
    Passing across the circles without escort,

One by whose means the city shall be opened.”







That hue which cowardice brought out on me,
    Beholding my Conductor backward turn,
    Sooner repressed within him his new colour.

He stopped attentive, like a man who listens,
    Because the eye could not conduct him far
    Through the black air, and through the heavy fog.

“Still it behoveth us to win the fight,”
    Began he; “Else. . .Such offered us herself. . .
    O how I long that some one here arrive!”

Well I perceived, as soon as the beginning
    He covered up with what came afterward,
    That they were words quite different from the first;

But none the less his saying gave me fear,
    Because I carried out the broken phrase,
    Perhaps to a worse meaning than he had.

“Into this bottom of the doleful conch
    Doth any e’er descend from the first grade,
    Which for its pain has only hope cut off?”

This question put I; and he answered me:
    “Seldom it comes to pass that one of us
    Maketh the journey upon which I go.

True is it, once before I here below
    Was conjured by that pitiless Erictho,
    Who summoned back the shades unto their bodies.

Naked of me short while the flesh had been,
    Before within that wall she made me enter,
    To bring a spirit from the circle of Judas;

That is the lowest region and the darkest,
    And farthest from the heaven which circles all.
    Well know I the way; therefore be reassured.

This fen, which a prodigious stench exhales,
    Encompasses about the city dolent,
    Where now we cannot enter without anger.”

And more he said, but not in mind I have it;
    Because mine eye had altogether drawn me
    Tow’rds the high tower with the red-flaming summit,

Where in a moment saw I swift uprisen
    The three infernal Furies stained with blood,
    Who had the limbs of women and their mien,

And with the greenest hydras were begirt;
    Small serpents and cerastes were their tresses,
    Wherewith their horrid temples were entwined.

And he who well the handmaids of the Queen
    Of everlasting lamentation knew,
    Said unto me: “Behold the fierce Erinnys.

This is Megaera, on the left-hand side;
    She who is weeping on the right, Alecto;
    Tisiphone is between;” and then was silent.

Each one her breast was rending with her nails;
    They beat them with their palms, and cried so loud,
    That I for dread pressed close unto the Poet.

“Medusa come, so we to stone will change him!”
    All shouted looking down; “in evil hour
    Avenged we not on Theseus his assault!”

“Turn thyself round, and keep thine eyes close shut,
    For if the Gorgon appear, and thou shouldst see it,
    No more returning upward would there be.”

Thus said the Master; and he turned me round
    Himself, and trusted not unto my hands
    So far as not to blind me with his own.

O ye who have undistempered intellects,
    Observe the doctrine that conceals itself
    Beneath the veil of the mysterious verses!

And now there came across the turbid waves
    The clangour of a sound with terror fraught,
    Because of which both of the margins trembled;

Not otherwise it was than of a wind
    Impetuous on account of adverse heats,
    That smites the forest, and, without restraint,

The branches rends, beats down, and bears away;
    Right onward, laden with dust, it goes superb,
    And puts to flight the wild beasts and the shepherds.

Mine eyes he loosed, and said: “Direct the nerve
    Of vision now along that ancient foam,
    There yonder where that smoke is most intense.”

Even as the frogs before the hostile serpent
    Across the water scatter all abroad,
    Until each one is huddled in the earth.

More than a thousand ruined souls I saw,
    Thus fleeing from before one who on foot
    Was passing o’er the Styx with soles unwet.

From off his face he fanned that unctuous air,
    Waving his left hand oft in front of him,
    And only with that anguish seemed he weary.

Well I perceived one sent from Heaven was he,
    And to the Master turned; and he made sign
    That I should quiet stand, and bow before him.

Ah! how disdainful he appeared to me!
    He reached the gate, and with a little rod
    He opened it, for there was no resistance.

“O banished out of Heaven, people despised!”
    Thus he began upon the horrid threshold;
    “Whence is this arrogance within you couched?

Wherefore recalcitrate against that will,
    From which the end can never be cut off,
    And which has many times increased your pain?

What helpeth it to butt against the fates?
    Your Cerberus, if you remember well,
    For that still bears his chin and gullet peeled.”

Then he returned along the miry road,
    And spake no word to us, but had the look
    Of one whom other care constrains and goads

Than that of him who in his presence is;
    And we our feet directed tow’rds the city,
    After those holy words all confident.

Within we entered without any contest;
    And I, who inclination had to see
    What the condition such a fortress holds,

Soon as I was within, cast round mine eye,
    And see on every hand an ample plain,
    Full of distress and torment terrible.

Even as at Arles, where stagnant grows the Rhone,
    Even as at Pola near to the Quarnaro,
    That shuts in Italy and bathes its borders,

The sepulchres make all the place uneven;
    So likewise did they there on every side,
    Saving that there the manner was more bitter;

For flames between the sepulchres were scattered,
    By which they so intensely heated were,
    That iron more so asks not any art.

All of their coverings uplifted were,
    And from them issued forth such dire laments,
    Sooth seemed they of the wretched and tormented.

And I: “My Master, what are all those people
    Who, having sepulture within those tombs,
    Make themselves audible by doleful sighs?”

And he to me: “Here are the Heresiarchs,
    With their disciples of all sects, and much
    More than thou thinkest laden are the tombs.

Here like together with its like is buried;
    And more and less the monuments are heated.”
    And when he to the right had turned, we passed

Between the torments and high parapets.






Now onward goes, along a narrow path
    Between the torments and the city wall,
    My Master, and I follow at his back.

“O power supreme, that through these impious circles
    Turnest me,” I began, “as pleases thee,
    Speak to me, and my longings satisfy;

The people who are lying in these tombs,
    Might they be seen? already are uplifted
    The covers all, and no one keepeth guard.”

And he to me: “They all will be closed up
    When from Jehoshaphat they shall return
    Here with the bodies they have left above.

Their cemetery have upon this side
    With Epicurus all his followers,
    Who with the body mortal make the soul;

But in the question thou dost put to me,
    Within here shalt thou soon be satisfied,
    And likewise in the wish thou keepest silent.”

And I: “Good Leader, I but keep concealed
    From thee my heart, that I may speak the less,
    Nor only now hast thou thereto disposed me.”

“O Tuscan, thou who through the city of fire
    Goest alive, thus speaking modestly,
    Be pleased to stay thy footsteps in this place.

Thy mode of speaking makes thee manifest
    A native of that noble fatherland,
    To which perhaps I too molestful was.”

Upon a sudden issued forth this sound
    From out one of the tombs; wherefore I pressed,
    Fearing, a little nearer to my Leader.

And unto me he said: “Turn thee; what dost thou?
    Behold there Farinata who has risen;
    From the waist upwards wholly shalt thou see him.”

I had already fixed mine eyes on his,
    And he uprose erect with breast and front
    E’en as if Hell he had in great despite.

And with courageous hands and prompt my Leader
    Thrust me between the sepulchres towards him,
    Exclaiming, “Let thy words explicit be.”

As soon as I was at the foot of his tomb
    Somewhat he eyed me, and, as if disdainful,
    Then asked of me, “Who were thine ancestors?”

I, who desirous of obeying was,
    Concealed it not, but all revealed to him;
    Whereat he raised his brows a little upward.

Then said he: “Fiercely adverse have they been
    To me, and to my fathers, and my party;
    So that two several times I scattered them.”

“If they were banished, they returned on all sides,”
    I answered him, “the first time and the second;
    But yours have not acquired that art aright.”

Then there uprose upon the sight, uncovered
    Down to the chin, a shadow at his side;
    I think that he had risen on his knees.

Round me he gazed, as if solicitude
    He had to see if some one else were with me,
    But after his suspicion was all spent,

Weeping, he said to me: “If through this blind
    Prison thou goest by loftiness of genius,
    Where is my son? and why is he not with thee?”

And I to him: “I come not of myself;
    He who is waiting yonder leads me here,
    Whom in disdain perhaps your Guido had.”

His language and the mode of punishment
    Already unto me had read his name;
    On that account my answer was so full.

Up starting suddenly, he cried out: “How
    Saidst thou,—he had?  Is he not still alive?
    Does not the sweet light strike upon his eyes?”

When he became aware of some delay,
    Which I before my answer made, supine
    He fell again, and forth appeared no more.

But the other, magnanimous, at whose desire
    I had remained, did not his aspect change,
    Neither his neck he moved, nor bent his side.

“And if,” continuing his first discourse,
    “They have that art,” he said, “not learned aright,
    That more tormenteth me, than doth this bed.

But fifty times shall not rekindled be
    The countenance of the Lady who reigns here,
    Ere thou shalt know how heavy is that art;

And as thou wouldst to the sweet world return,
    Say why that people is so pitiless
    Against my race in each one of its laws?”

Whence I to him: “The slaughter and great carnage
    Which have with crimson stained the Arbia, cause
    Such orisons in our temple to be made.”

After his head he with a sigh had shaken,
    “There I was not alone,” he said, “nor surely
    Without a cause had with the others moved.

But there I was alone, where every one
    Consented to the laying waste of Florence,
    He who defended her with open face.”

“Ah! so hereafter may your seed repose,”
    I him entreated, “solve for me that knot,
    Which has entangled my conceptions here.

It seems that you can see, if I hear rightly,
    Beforehand whatsoe’er time brings with it,
    And in the present have another mode.”

“We see, like those who have imperfect sight,
    The things,” he said, “that distant are from us;
    So much still shines on us the Sovereign Ruler.

When they draw near, or are, is wholly vain
    Our intellect, and if none brings it to us,
    Not anything know we of your human state.

Hence thou canst understand, that wholly dead
    Will be our knowledge from the moment when
    The portal of the future shall be closed.”

Then I, as if compunctious for my fault,
    Said: “Now, then, you will tell that fallen one,
    That still his son is with the living joined.

And if just now, in answering, I was dumb,
    Tell him I did it because I was thinking
    Already of the error you have solved me.”

And now my Master was recalling me,
    Wherefore more eagerly I prayed the spirit
    That he would tell me who was with him there.

He said: “With more than a thousand here I lie;
    Within here is the second Frederick,
    And the Cardinal, and of the rest I speak not.”

Thereon he hid himself; and I towards
    The ancient poet turned my steps, reflecting
    Upon that saying, which seemed hostile to me.

He moved along; and afterward thus going,
    He said to me, “Why art thou so bewildered?”
    And I in his inquiry satisfied him.

“Let memory preserve what thou hast heard
    Against thyself,” that Sage commanded me,
    “And now attend here;” and he raised his finger.

“When thou shalt be before the radiance sweet
    Of her whose beauteous eyes all things behold,
    From her thou’lt know the journey of thy life.”

Unto the left hand then he turned his feet;
    We left the wall, and went towards the middle,
    Along a path that strikes into a valley,

Which even up there unpleasant made its stench.







Upon the margin of a lofty bank
    Which great rocks broken in a circle made,
    We came upon a still more cruel throng;

And there, by reason of the horrible
    Excess of stench the deep abyss throws out,
    We drew ourselves aside behind the cover

Of a great tomb, whereon I saw a writing,
    Which said: “Pope Anastasius I hold,
    Whom out of the right way Photinus drew.”

“Slow it behoveth our descent to be,
    So that the sense be first a little used
    To the sad blast, and then we shall not heed it.”

The Master thus; and unto him I said,
    “Some compensation find, that the time pass not
    Idly;” and he: “Thou seest I think of that.

My son, upon the inside of these rocks,”
    Began he then to say, “are three small circles,
    From grade to grade, like those which thou art leaving.

They all are full of spirits maledict;
    But that hereafter sight alone suffice thee,
    Hear how and wherefore they are in constraint.

Of every malice that wins hate in Heaven,
    Injury is the end; and all such end
    Either by force or fraud afflicteth others.

But because fraud is man’s peculiar vice,
    More it displeases God; and so stand lowest
    The fraudulent, and greater dole assails them.

All the first circle of the Violent is;
    But since force may be used against three persons,
    In three rounds ’tis divided and constructed.

To God, to ourselves, and to our neighbour can we
    Use force; I say on them and on their things,
    As thou shalt hear with reason manifest.

A death by violence, and painful wounds,
    Are to our neighbour given; and in his substance
    Ruin, and arson, and injurious levies;

Whence homicides, and he who smites unjustly,
    Marauders, and freebooters, the first round
    Tormenteth all in companies diverse.

Man may lay violent hands upon himself
    And his own goods; and therefore in the second
    Round must perforce without avail repent

Whoever of your world deprives himself,
    Who games, and dissipates his property,
    And weepeth there, where he should jocund be.

Violence can be done the Deity,
    In heart denying and blaspheming Him,
    And by disdaining Nature and her bounty.

And for this reason doth the smallest round
    Seal with its signet Sodom and Cahors,
    And who, disdaining God, speaks from the heart.

Fraud, wherewithal is every conscience stung,
    A man may practise upon him who trusts,
    And him who doth no confidence imburse.

This latter mode, it would appear, dissevers
    Only the bond of love which Nature makes;
    Wherefore within the second circle nestle

Hypocrisy, flattery, and who deals in magic,
    Falsification, theft, and simony,
    Panders, and barrators, and the like filth.

By the other mode, forgotten is that love
    Which Nature makes, and what is after added,
    From which there is a special faith engendered.

Hence in the smallest circle, where the point is
    Of the Universe, upon which Dis is seated,
    Whoe’er betrays for ever is consumed.”

And I: “My Master, clear enough proceeds
    Thy reasoning, and full well distinguishes
    This cavern and the people who possess it.

But tell me, those within the fat lagoon,
    Whom the wind drives, and whom the rain doth beat,
    And who encounter with such bitter tongues,

Wherefore are they inside of the red city
    Not punished, if God has them in his wrath,
    And if he has not, wherefore in such fashion?”

And unto me he said: “Why wanders so
    Thine intellect from that which it is wont?
    Or, sooth, thy mind where is it elsewhere looking?

Hast thou no recollection of those words
    With which thine Ethics thoroughly discusses
    The dispositions three, that Heaven abides not,—

Incontinence, and Malice, and insane
    Bestiality? and how Incontinence
    Less God offendeth, and less blame attracts?

If thou regardest this conclusion well,
    And to thy mind recallest who they are
    That up outside are undergoing penance,

Clearly wilt thou perceive why from these felons
    They separated are, and why less wroth
    Justice divine doth smite them with its hammer.”

“O Sun, that healest all distempered vision,
    Thou dost content me so, when thou resolvest,
    That doubting pleases me no less than knowing!

Once more a little backward turn thee,” said I,
    “There where thou sayest that usury offends
    Goodness divine, and disengage the knot.”

“Philosophy,” he said, “to him who heeds it,
    Noteth, not only in one place alone,
    After what manner Nature takes her course

From Intellect Divine, and from its art;
    And if thy Physics carefully thou notest,
    After not many pages shalt thou find,

That this your art as far as possible
    Follows, as the disciple doth the master;
    So that your art is, as it were, God’s grandchild.

From these two, if thou bringest to thy mind
    Genesis at the beginning, it behoves
    Mankind to gain their life and to advance;

And since the usurer takes another way,
    Nature herself and in her follower
    Disdains he, for elsewhere he puts his hope.

But follow, now, as I would fain go on,
    For quivering are the Fishes on the horizon,
    And the Wain wholly over Caurus lies,

And far beyond there we descend the crag.”







The place where to descend the bank we came
    Was alpine, and from what was there, moreover,
    Of such a kind that every eye would shun it.

Such as that ruin is which in the flank
    Smote, on this side of Trent, the Adige,
    Either by earthquake or by failing stay,

For from the mountain’s top, from which it moved,
    Unto the plain the cliff is shattered so,
    Some path ’twould give to him who was above;

Even such was the descent of that ravine,
    And on the border of the broken chasm
    The infamy of Crete was stretched along,

Who was conceived in the fictitious cow;
    And when he us beheld, he bit himself,
    Even as one whom anger racks within.

My Sage towards him shouted: “Peradventure
    Thou think’st that here may be the Duke of Athens,
    Who in the world above brought death to thee?

Get thee gone, beast, for this one cometh not
    Instructed by thy sister, but he comes
    In order to behold your punishments.”

As is that bull who breaks loose at the moment
    In which he has received the mortal blow,
    Who cannot walk, but staggers here and there,

The Minotaur beheld I do the like;
    And he, the wary, cried: “Run to the passage;
    While he wroth, ’tis well thou shouldst descend.”

Thus down we took our way o’er that discharge
    Of stones, which oftentimes did move themselves
    Beneath my feet, from the unwonted burden.

Thoughtful I went; and he said: “Thou art thinking
    Perhaps upon this ruin, which is guarded
    By that brute anger which just now I quenched.

Now will I have thee know, the other time
    I here descended to the nether Hell,
    This precipice had not yet fallen down.

But truly, if I well discern, a little
    Before His coming who the mighty spoil
    Bore off from Dis, in the supernal circle,

Upon all sides the deep and loathsome valley
    Trembled so, that I thought the Universe
    Was thrilled with love, by which there are who think

The world ofttimes converted into chaos;
    And at that moment this primeval crag
    Both here and elsewhere made such overthrow.

But fix thine eyes below; for draweth near
    The river of blood, within which boiling is
    Whoe’er by violence doth injure others.”

O blind cupidity, O wrath insane,
    That spurs us onward so in our short life,
    And in the eternal then so badly steeps us!

I saw an ample moat bent like a bow,
    As one which all the plain encompasses,
    Conformable to what my Guide had said.

And between this and the embankment’s foot
    Centaurs in file were running, armed with arrows,
    As in the world they used the chase to follow.

Beholding us descend, each one stood still,
    And from the squadron three detached themselves,
    With bows and arrows in advance selected;

And from afar one cried: “Unto what torment
    Come ye, who down the hillside are descending?
    Tell us from there; if not, I draw the bow.”

My Master said: “Our answer will we make
    To Chiron, near you there; in evil hour,
    That will of thine was evermore so hasty.”

Then touched he me, and said: “This one is Nessus,
    Who perished for the lovely Dejanira,
    And for himself, himself did vengeance take.

And he in the midst, who at his breast is gazing,
    Is the great Chiron, who brought up Achilles;
    That other Pholus is, who was so wrathful.

Thousands and thousands go about the moat
    Shooting with shafts whatever soul emerges
    Out of the blood, more than his crime allots.”

Near we approached unto those monsters fleet;
    Chiron an arrow took, and with the notch
    Backward upon his jaws he put his beard.

After he had uncovered his great mouth,
    He said to his companions: “Are you ware
    That he behind moveth whate’er he touches?

Thus are not wont to do the feet of dead men.”
    And my good Guide, who now was at his breast,
    Where the two natures are together joined,

Replied: “Indeed he lives, and thus alone
    Me it behoves to show him the dark valley;
    Necessity, and not delight, impels us.

Some one withdrew from singing Halleluja,
    Who unto me committed this new office;
    No thief is he, nor I a thievish spirit.

But by that virtue through which I am moving
    My steps along this savage thoroughfare,
    Give us some one of thine, to be with us,

And who may show us where to pass the ford,
    And who may carry this one on his back;
    For ’tis no spirit that can walk the air.”

Upon his right breast Chiron wheeled about,
    And said to Nessus: “Turn and do thou guide them,
    And warn aside, if other band may meet you.”

We with our faithful escort onward moved
    Along the brink of the vermilion boiling,
    Wherein the boiled were uttering loud laments.

People I saw within up to the eyebrows,
    And the great Centaur said: “Tyrants are these,
    Who dealt in bloodshed and in pillaging.

Here they lament their pitiless mischiefs; here
    Is Alexander, and fierce Dionysius
    Who upon Sicily brought dolorous years.

That forehead there which has the hair so black
    Is Azzolin; and the other who is blond,
    Obizzo is of Esti, who, in truth,

Up in the world was by his stepson slain.”
    Then turned I to the Poet; and he said,
    “Now he be first to thee, and second I.”

A little farther on the Centaur stopped
    Above a folk, who far down as the throat
    Seemed from that boiling stream to issue forth.

A shade he showed us on one side alone,
    Saying: “He cleft asunder in God’s bosom
    The heart that still upon the Thames is honoured.”

Then people saw I, who from out the river
    Lifted their heads and also all the chest;
    And many among these I recognised.

Thus ever more and more grew shallower
    That blood, so that the feet alone it covered;
    And there across the moat our passage was.

“Even as thou here upon this side beholdest
    The boiling stream, that aye diminishes,”
    The Centaur said, “I wish thee to believe

That on this other more and more declines
    Its bed, until it reunites itself
    Where it behoveth tyranny to groan.

Justice divine, upon this side, is goading
    That Attila, who was a scourge on earth,
    And Pyrrhus, and Sextus; and for ever milks

The tears which with the boiling it unseals
    In Rinier da Corneto and Rinier Pazzo,
    Who made upon the highways so much war.”

Then back he turned, and passed again the ford.







Not yet had Nessus reached the other side,
    When we had put ourselves within a wood,
    That was not marked by any path whatever.

Not foliage green, but of a dusky colour,
    Not branches smooth, but gnarled and intertangled,
    Not apple-trees were there, but thorns with poison.

Such tangled thickets have not, nor so dense,
    Those savage wild beasts, that in hatred hold
    ’Twixt Cecina and Corneto the tilled places.

There do the hideous Harpies make their nests,
    Who chased the Trojans from the Strophades,
    With sad announcement of impending doom;

Broad wings have they, and necks and faces human,
    And feet with claws, and their great bellies fledged;
    They make laments upon the wondrous trees.

And the good Master: “Ere thou enter farther,
    Know that thou art within the second round,”
    Thus he began to say, “and shalt be, till

Thou comest out upon the horrible sand;
    Therefore look well around, and thou shalt see
    Things that will credence give unto my speech.”

I heard on all sides lamentations uttered,
    And person none beheld I who might make them,
    Whence, utterly bewildered, I stood still.

I think he thought that I perhaps might think
    So many voices issued through those trunks
    From people who concealed themselves from us;

Therefore the Master said: “If thou break off
    Some little spray from any of these trees,
    The thoughts thou hast will wholly be made vain.”

Then stretched I forth my hand a little forward,
    And plucked a branchlet off from a great thorn;
    And the trunk cried, “Why dost thou mangle me?”

After it had become embrowned with blood,
    It recommenced its cry: “Why dost thou rend me?
    Hast thou no spirit of pity whatsoever?

Men once we were, and now are changed to trees;
    Indeed, thy hand should be more pitiful,
    Even if the souls of serpents we had been.”

As out of a green brand, that is on fire
    At one of the ends, and from the other drips
    And hisses with the wind that is escaping;

So from that splinter issued forth together
    Both words and blood; whereat I let the tip
    Fall, and stood like a man who is afraid.

“Had he been able sooner to believe,”
    My Sage made answer, “O thou wounded soul,
    What only in my verses he has seen,

Not upon thee had he stretched forth his hand;
    Whereas the thing incredible has caused me
    To put him to an act which grieveth me.

But tell him who thou wast, so that by way
    Of some amends thy fame he may refresh
    Up in the world, to which he can return.”

And the trunk said: “So thy sweet words allure me,
    I cannot silent be; and you be vexed not,
    That I a little to discourse am tempted.

I am the one who both keys had in keeping
    Of Frederick’s heart, and turned them to and fro
    So softly in unlocking and in locking,

That from his secrets most men I withheld;
    Fidelity I bore the glorious office
    So great, I lost thereby my sleep and pulses.

The courtesan who never from the dwelling
    Of Caesar turned aside her strumpet eyes,
    Death universal and the vice of courts,

Inflamed against me all the other minds,
    And they, inflamed, did so inflame Augustus,
    That my glad honours turned to dismal mournings.

My spirit, in disdainful exultation,
    Thinking by dying to escape disdain,
    Made me unjust against myself, the just.

I, by the roots unwonted of this wood,
    Do swear to you that never broke I faith
    Unto my lord, who was so worthy of honour;

And to the world if one of you return,
    Let him my memory comfort, which is lying
    Still prostrate from the blow that envy dealt it.”

Waited awhile, and then: “Since he is silent,”
    The Poet said to me, “lose not the time,
    But speak, and question him, if more may please thee.”

Whence I to him: “Do thou again inquire
    Concerning what thou thinks’t will satisfy me;
    For I cannot, such pity is in my heart.”

Therefore he recommenced: “So may the man
    Do for thee freely what thy speech implores,
    Spirit incarcerate, again be pleased

To tell us in what way the soul is bound
    Within these knots; and tell us, if thou canst,
    If any from such members e’er is freed.”

Then blew the trunk amain, and afterward
    The wind was into such a voice converted:
    “With brevity shall be replied to you.

When the exasperated soul abandons
    The body whence it rent itself away,
    Minos consigns it to the seventh abyss.

It falls into the forest, and no part
    Is chosen for it; but where Fortune hurls it,
    There like a grain of spelt it germinates.

It springs a sapling, and a forest tree;
    The Harpies, feeding then upon its leaves,
    Do pain create, and for the pain an outlet.

Like others for our spoils shall we return;
    But not that any one may them revest,
    For ’tis not just to have what one casts off.

Here we shall drag them, and along the dismal
    Forest our bodies shall suspended be,
    Each to the thorn of his molested shade.”

We were attentive still unto the trunk,
    Thinking that more it yet might wish to tell us,
    When by a tumult we were overtaken,

In the same way as he is who perceives
    The boar and chase approaching to his stand,
    Who hears the crashing of the beasts and branches;

And two behold! upon our left-hand side,
    Naked and scratched, fleeing so furiously,
    That of the forest, every fan they broke.

He who was in advance: “Now help, Death, help!”
    And the other one, who seemed to lag too much,
    Was shouting: “Lano, were not so alert

Those legs of thine at joustings of the Toppo!”
    And then, perchance because his breath was failing,
    He grouped himself together with a bush.

Behind them was the forest full of black
    She-mastiffs, ravenous, and swift of foot
    As greyhounds, who are issuing from the chain.

On him who had crouched down they set their teeth,
    And him they lacerated piece by piece,
    Thereafter bore away those aching members.

Thereat my Escort took me by the hand,
    And led me to the bush, that all in vain
    Was weeping from its bloody lacerations.

“O Jacopo,” it said, “of Sant’ Andrea,
    What helped it thee of me to make a screen?
    What blame have I in thy nefarious life?”

When near him had the Master stayed his steps,
    He said: “Who wast thou, that through wounds so many
    Art blowing out with blood thy dolorous speech?”

And he to us: “O souls, that hither come
    To look upon the shameful massacre
    That has so rent away from me my leaves,

Gather them up beneath the dismal bush;
    I of that city was which to the Baptist
    Changed its first patron, wherefore he for this

Forever with his art will make it sad.
    And were it not that on the pass of Arno
    Some glimpses of him are remaining still,

Those citizens, who afterwards rebuilt it
    Upon the ashes left by Attila,
    In vain had caused their labour to be done.

Of my own house I made myself a gibbet.”







Because the charity of my native place
    Constrained me, gathered I the scattered leaves,
    And gave them back to him, who now was hoarse.

Then came we to the confine, where disparted
    The second round is from the third, and where
    A horrible form of Justice is beheld.

Clearly to manifest these novel things,
    I say that we arrived upon a plain,
    Which from its bed rejecteth every plant;

The dolorous forest is a garland to it
    All round about, as the sad moat to that;
    There close upon the edge we stayed our feet.

The soil was of an arid and thick sand,
    Not of another fashion made than that
    Which by the feet of Cato once was pressed.

Vengeance of God, O how much oughtest thou
    By each one to be dreaded, who doth read
    That which was manifest unto mine eyes!

Of naked souls beheld I many herds,
    Who all were weeping very miserably,
    And over them seemed set a law diverse.

Supine upon the ground some folk were lying;
    And some were sitting all drawn up together,
    And others went about continually.

Those who were going round were far the more,
    And those were less who lay down to their torment,
    But had their tongues more loosed to lamentation.

O’er all the sand-waste, with a gradual fall,
    Were raining down dilated flakes of fire,
    As of the snow on Alp without a wind.

As Alexander, in those torrid parts
    Of India, beheld upon his host
    Flames fall unbroken till they reached the ground.

Whence he provided with his phalanxes
    To trample down the soil, because the vapour
    Better extinguished was while it was single;

Thus was descending the eternal heat,
    Whereby the sand was set on fire, like tinder
    Beneath the steel, for doubling of the dole.

Without repose forever was the dance
    Of miserable hands, now there, now here,
    Shaking away from off them the fresh gleeds.

“Master,” began I, “thou who overcomest
    All things except the demons dire, that issued
    Against us at the entrance of the gate,

Who is that mighty one who seems to heed not
    The fire, and lieth lowering and disdainful,
    So that the rain seems not to ripen him?”

And he himself, who had become aware
    That I was questioning my Guide about him,
    Cried: “Such as I was living, am I, dead.

If Jove should weary out his smith, from whom
    He seized in anger the sharp thunderbolt,
    Wherewith upon the last day I was smitten,

And if he wearied out by turns the others
    In Mongibello at the swarthy forge,
    Vociferating, ‘Help, good Vulcan, help!’

Even as he did there at the fight of Phlegra,
    And shot his bolts at me with all his might,
    He would not have thereby a joyous vengeance.”

Then did my Leader speak with such great force,
    That I had never heard him speak so loud:
    “O Capaneus, in that is not extinguished

Thine arrogance, thou punished art the more;
    Not any torment, saving thine own rage,
    Would be unto thy fury pain complete.”

Then he turned round to me with better lip,
    Saying: “One of the Seven Kings was he
    Who Thebes besieged, and held, and seems to hold

God in disdain, and little seems to prize him;
    But, as I said to him, his own despites
    Are for his breast the fittest ornaments.

Now follow me, and mind thou do not place
    As yet thy feet upon the burning sand,
    But always keep them close unto the wood.”

Speaking no word, we came to where there gushes
    Forth from the wood a little rivulet,
    Whose redness makes my hair still stand on end.

As from the Bulicame springs the brooklet,
    The sinful women later share among them,
    So downward through the sand it went its way.

The bottom of it, and both sloping banks,
    Were made of stone, and the margins at the side;
    Whence I perceived that there the passage was.

“In all the rest which I have shown to thee
    Since we have entered in within the gate
    Whose threshold unto no one is denied,

Nothing has been discovered by thine eyes
    So notable as is the present river,
    Which all the little flames above it quenches.”

These words were of my Leader; whence I prayed him
    That he would give me largess of the food,
    For which he had given me largess of desire.

“In the mid-sea there sits a wasted land,”
    Said he thereafterward, “whose name is Crete,
    Under whose king the world of old was chaste.

There is a mountain there, that once was glad
    With waters and with leaves, which was called Ida;
    Now ’tis deserted, as a thing worn out.

Rhea once chose it for the faithful cradle
    Of her own son; and to conceal him better,
    Whene’er he cried, she there had clamours made.

A grand old man stands in the mount erect,
    Who holds his shoulders turned tow’rds Damietta,
    And looks at Rome as if it were his mirror.

His head is fashioned of refined gold,
    And of pure silver are the arms and breast;
    Then he is brass as far down as the fork.

From that point downward all is chosen iron,
    Save that the right foot is of kiln-baked clay,
    And more he stands on that than on the other.

Each part, except the gold, is by a fissure
    Asunder cleft, that dripping is with tears,
    Which gathered together perforate that cavern.

From rock to rock they fall into this valley;
    Acheron, Styx, and Phlegethon they form;
    Then downward go along this narrow sluice

Unto that point where is no more descending.
    They form Cocytus; what that pool may be
    Thou shalt behold, so here ’tis not narrated.”

And I to him: “If so the present runnel
    Doth take its rise in this way from our world,
    Why only on this verge appears it to us?”

And he to me: “Thou knowest the place is round,
    And notwithstanding thou hast journeyed far,
    Still to the left descending to the bottom,

Thou hast not yet through all the circle turned.
    Therefore if something new appear to us,
    It should not bring amazement to thy face.”

And I again: “Master, where shall be found
    Lethe and Phlegethon, for of one thou’rt silent,
    And sayest the other of this rain is made?”

“In all thy questions truly thou dost please me,”
    Replied he; “but the boiling of the red
    Water might well solve one of them thou makest.

Thou shalt see Lethe, but outside this moat,
    There where the souls repair to lave themselves,
    When sin repented of has been removed.”

Then said he: “It is time now to abandon
    The wood; take heed that thou come after me;
    A way the margins make that are not burning,

And over them all vapours are extinguished.”







Now bears us onward one of the hard margins,
    And so the brooklet’s mist o’ershadows it,
    From fire it saves the water and the dikes.

Even as the Flemings, ’twixt Cadsand and Bruges,
    Fearing the flood that tow’rds them hurls itself,
    Their bulwarks build to put the sea to flight;

And as the Paduans along the Brenta,
    To guard their villas and their villages,
    Or ever Chiarentana feel the heat;

In such similitude had those been made,
    Albeit not so lofty nor so thick,
    Whoever he might be, the master made them.

Now were we from the forest so remote,
    I could not have discovered where it was,
    Even if backward I had turned myself,

When we a company of souls encountered,
    Who came beside the dike, and every one
    Gazed at us, as at evening we are wont

To eye each other under a new moon,
    And so towards us sharpened they their brows
    As an old tailor at the needle’s eye.

Thus scrutinised by such a family,
    By some one I was recognised, who seized
    My garment’s hem, and cried out, “What a marvel!”

And I, when he stretched forth his arm to me,
    On his baked aspect fastened so mine eyes,
    That the scorched countenance prevented not

His recognition by my intellect;
    And bowing down my face unto his own,
    I made reply, “Are you here, Ser Brunetto?”

And he: “May’t not displease thee, O my son,
    If a brief space with thee Brunetto Latini
    Backward return and let the trail go on.”

I said to him: “With all my power I ask it;
    And if you wish me to sit down with you,
    I will, if he please, for I go with him.”

“O son,” he said, “whoever of this herd
    A moment stops, lies then a hundred years,
    Nor fans himself when smiteth him the fire.

Therefore go on; I at thy skirts will come,
    And afterward will I rejoin my band,
    Which goes lamenting its eternal doom.”

I did not dare to go down from the road
    Level to walk with him; but my head bowed
    I held as one who goeth reverently.

And he began: “What fortune or what fate
    Before the last day leadeth thee down here?
    And who is this that showeth thee the way?”

“Up there above us in the life serene,”
    I answered him, “I lost me in a valley,
    Or ever yet my age had been completed.

But yestermorn I turned my back upon it;
    This one appeared to me, returning thither,
    And homeward leadeth me along this road.”

And he to me: “If thou thy star do follow,
    Thou canst not fail thee of a glorious port,
    If well I judged in the life beautiful.

And if I had not died so prematurely,
    Seeing Heaven thus benignant unto thee,
    I would have given thee comfort in the work.

But that ungrateful and malignant people,
    Which of old time from Fesole descended,
    And smacks still of the mountain and the granite,

Will make itself, for thy good deeds, thy foe;
    And it is right; for among crabbed sorbs
    It ill befits the sweet fig to bear fruit.

Old rumour in the world proclaims them blind;
    A people avaricious, envious, proud;
    Take heed that of their customs thou do cleanse thee.

Thy fortune so much honour doth reserve thee,
    One party and the other shall be hungry
    For thee; but far from goat shall be the grass.

Their litter let the beasts of Fesole
    Make of themselves, nor let them touch the plant,
    If any still upon their dunghill rise,

In which may yet revive the consecrated
    Seed of those Romans, who remained there when
    The nest of such great malice it became.”

“If my entreaty wholly were fulfilled,”
    Replied I to him, “not yet would you be
    In banishment from human nature placed;

For in my mind is fixed, and touches now
    My heart the dear and good paternal image
    Of you, when in the world from hour to hour

You taught me how a man becomes eternal;
    And how much I am grateful, while I live
    Behoves that in my language be discerned.

What you narrate of my career I write,
    And keep it to be glossed with other text
    By a Lady who can do it, if I reach her.

This much will I have manifest to you;
    Provided that my conscience do not chide me,
    For whatsoever Fortune I am ready.

Such handsel is not new unto mine ears;
    Therefore let Fortune turn her wheel around
    As it may please her, and the churl his mattock.”

My Master thereupon on his right cheek
    Did backward turn himself, and looked at me;
    Then said: “He listeneth well who noteth it.”

Nor speaking less on that account, I go
    With Ser Brunetto, and I ask who are
    His most known and most eminent companions.

And he to me: “To know of some is well;
    Of others it were laudable to be silent,
    For short would be the time for so much speech.

Know them in sum, that all of them were clerks,
    And men of letters great and of great fame,
    In the world tainted with the selfsame sin.

Priscian goes yonder with that wretched crowd,
    And Francis of Accorso; and thou hadst seen there
    If thou hadst had a hankering for such scurf,

That one, who by the Servant of the Servants
    From Arno was transferred to Bacchiglione,
    Where he has left his sin-excited nerves.

More would I say, but coming and discoursing
    Can be no longer; for that I behold
    New smoke uprising yonder from the sand.

A people comes with whom I may not be;
    Commended unto thee be my Tesoro,
    In which I still live, and no more I ask.”

Then he turned round, and seemed to be of those
    Who at Verona run for the Green Mantle
    Across the plain; and seemed to be among them

The one who wins, and not the one who loses.






Now was I where was heard the reverberation
    Of water falling into the next round,
    Like to that humming which the beehives make,

When shadows three together started forth,
    Running, from out a company that passed
    Beneath the rain of the sharp martyrdom.

Towards us came they, and each one cried out:
    “Stop, thou; for by thy garb to us thou seemest
    To be some one of our depraved city.”

Ah me! what wounds I saw upon their limbs,
    Recent and ancient by the flames burnt in!
    It pains me still but to remember it.

Unto their cries my Teacher paused attentive;
    He turned his face towards me, and “Now wait,”
    He said; “to these we should be courteous.

And if it were not for the fire that darts
    The nature of this region, I should say
    That haste were more becoming thee than them.”

As soon as we stood still, they recommenced
    The old refrain, and when they overtook us,
    Formed of themselves a wheel, all three of them.

As champions stripped and oiled are wont to do,
    Watching for their advantage and their hold,
    Before they come to blows and thrusts between them,

Thus, wheeling round, did every one his visage
    Direct to me, so that in opposite wise
    His neck and feet continual journey made.

And, “If the misery of this soft place
    Bring in disdain ourselves and our entreaties,”
    Began one, “and our aspect black and blistered,

Let the renown of us thy mind incline
    To tell us who thou art, who thus securely
    Thy living feet dost move along through Hell.

He in whose footprints thou dost see me treading,
    Naked and skinless though he now may go,
    Was of a greater rank than thou dost think;

He was the grandson of the good Gualdrada;
    His name was Guidoguerra, and in life
    Much did he with his wisdom and his sword.

The other, who close by me treads the sand,
    Tegghiaio Aldobrandi is, whose fame
    Above there in the world should welcome be.

And I, who with them on the cross am placed,
    Jacopo Rusticucci was; and truly
    My savage wife, more than aught else, doth harm me.”

Could I have been protected from the fire,
    Below I should have thrown myself among them,
    And think the Teacher would have suffered it;

But as I should have burned and baked myself,
    My terror overmastered my good will,
    Which made me greedy of embracing them.

Then I began: “Sorrow and not disdain
    Did your condition fix within me so,
    That tardily it wholly is stripped off,

As soon as this my Lord said unto me
    Words, on account of which I thought within me
    That people such as you are were approaching.

I of your city am; and evermore
    Your labours and your honourable names
    I with affection have retraced and heard.

I leave the gall, and go for the sweet fruits
    Promised to me by the veracious Leader;
    But to the centre first I needs must plunge.”

“So may the soul for a long while conduct
    Those limbs of thine,” did he make answer then,
    “And so may thy renown shine after thee,

Valour and courtesy, say if they dwell
    Within our city, as they used to do,
    Or if they wholly have gone out of it;

For Guglielmo Borsier, who is in torment
    With us of late, and goes there with his comrades,
    Doth greatly mortify us with his words.”

“The new inhabitants and the sudden gains,
    Pride and extravagance have in thee engendered,
    Florence, so that thou weep’st thereat already!”

In this wise I exclaimed with face uplifted;
    And the three, taking that for my reply,
    Looked at each other, as one looks at truth.

“If other times so little it doth cost thee,”
    Replied they all, “to satisfy another,
    Happy art thou, thus speaking at thy will!

Therefore, if thou escape from these dark places,
    And come to rebehold the beauteous stars,
    When it shall pleasure thee to say, ‘I was,’

See that thou speak of us unto the people.”
    Then they broke up the wheel, and in their flight
    It seemed as if their agile legs were wings.

Not an Amen could possibly be said
    So rapidly as they had disappeared;
    Wherefore the Master deemed best to depart.

I followed him, and little had we gone,
    Before the sound of water was so near us,
    That speaking we should hardly have been heard.

Even as that stream which holdeth its own course
    The first from Monte Veso tow’rds the East,
    Upon the left-hand slope of Apennine,

Which is above called Acquacheta, ere
    It down descendeth into its low bed,
    And at Forli is vacant of that name,

Reverberates there above San Benedetto
    From Alps, by falling at a single leap,
    Where for a thousand there were room enough;

Thus downward from a bank precipitate,
    We found resounding that dark-tinted water,
    So that it soon the ear would have offended.

I had a cord around about me girt,
    And therewithal I whilom had designed
    To take the panther with the painted skin.

After I this had all from me unloosed,
    As my Conductor had commanded me,
    I reached it to him, gathered up and coiled,

Whereat he turned himself to the right side,
    And at a little distance from the verge,
    He cast it down into that deep abyss.

“It must needs be some novelty respond,”
    I said within myself, “to the new signal
    The Master with his eye is following so.”

Ah me! how very cautious men should be
    With those who not alone behold the act,
    But with their wisdom look into the thoughts!

He said to me: “Soon there will upward come
    What I await; and what thy thought is dreaming
    Must soon reveal itself unto thy sight.”

Aye to that truth which has the face of falsehood,
    A man should close his lips as far as may be,
    Because without his fault it causes shame;

But here I cannot; and, Reader, by the notes
    Of this my Comedy to thee I swear,
    So may they not be void of lasting favour,

Athwart that dense and darksome atmosphere
    I saw a figure swimming upward come,
    Marvellous unto every steadfast heart,

Even as he returns who goeth down
    Sometimes to clear an anchor, which has grappled
    Reef, or aught else that in the sea is hidden,

Who upward stretches, and draws in his feet.







“Behold the monster with the pointed tail,
    Who cleaves the hills, and breaketh walls and weapons,
    Behold him who infecteth all the world.”

Thus unto me my Guide began to say,
    And beckoned him that he should come to shore,
    Near to the confine of the trodden marble;

And that uncleanly image of deceit
    Came up and thrust ashore its head and bust,
    But on the border did not drag its tail.

The face was as the face of a just man,
    Its semblance outwardly was so benign,
    And of a serpent all the trunk beside.

Two paws it had, hairy unto the armpits;
    The back, and breast, and both the sides it had
    Depicted o’er with nooses and with shields.

With colours more, groundwork or broidery
    Never in cloth did Tartars make nor Turks,
    Nor were such tissues by Arachne laid.

As sometimes wherries lie upon the shore,
    That part are in the water, part on land;
    And as among the guzzling Germans there,

The beaver plants himself to wage his war;
    So that vile monster lay upon the border,
    Which is of stone, and shutteth in the sand.

His tail was wholly quivering in the void,
    Contorting upwards the envenomed fork,
    That in the guise of scorpion armed its point.

The Guide said: “Now perforce must turn aside
    Our way a little, even to that beast
    Malevolent, that yonder coucheth him.”

We therefore on the right side descended,
    And made ten steps upon the outer verge,
    Completely to avoid the sand and flame;

And after we are come to him, I see
    A little farther off upon the sand
    A people sitting near the hollow place.

Then said to me the Master: “So that full
    Experience of this round thou bear away,
    Now go and see what their condition is.

There let thy conversation be concise;
    Till thou returnest I will speak with him,
    That he concede to us his stalwart shoulders.”

Thus farther still upon the outermost
    Head of that seventh circle all alone
    I went, where sat the melancholy folk.

Out of their eyes was gushing forth their woe;
    This way, that way, they helped them with their hands
    Now from the flames and now from the hot soil.

Not otherwise in summer do the dogs,
    Now with the foot, now with the muzzle, when
    By fleas, or flies, or gadflies, they are bitten.

When I had turned mine eyes upon the faces
    Of some, on whom the dolorous fire is falling,
    Not one of them I knew; but I perceived

That from the neck of each there hung a pouch,
    Which certain colour had, and certain blazon;
    And thereupon it seems their eyes are feeding.

And as I gazing round me come among them,
    Upon a yellow pouch I azure saw
    That had the face and posture of a lion.

Proceeding then the current of my sight,
    Another of them saw I, red as blood,
    Display a goose more white than butter is.

And one, who with an azure sow and gravid
    Emblazoned had his little pouch of white,
    Said unto me: “What dost thou in this moat?

Now get thee gone; and since thou’rt still alive,
    Know that a neighbour of mine, Vitaliano,
    Will have his seat here on my left-hand side.

A Paduan am I with these Florentines;
    Full many a time they thunder in mine ears,
    Exclaiming, ‘Come the sovereign cavalier,

He who shall bring the satchel with three goats;’”
    Then twisted he his mouth, and forth he thrust
    His tongue, like to an ox that licks its nose.

And fearing lest my longer stay might vex
    Him who had warned me not to tarry long,
    Backward I turned me from those weary souls.

I found my Guide, who had already mounted
    Upon the back of that wild animal,
    And said to me: “Now be both strong and bold.

Now we descend by stairways such as these;
    Mount thou in front, for I will be midway,
    So that the tail may have no power to harm thee.”

Such as he is who has so near the ague
    Of quartan that his nails are blue already,
    And trembles all, but looking at the shade;

Even such became I at those proffered words;
    But shame in me his menaces produced,
    Which maketh servant strong before good master.

I seated me upon those monstrous shoulders;
    I wished to say, and yet the voice came not
    As I believed, “Take heed that thou embrace me.”

But he, who other times had rescued me
    In other peril, soon as I had mounted,
    Within his arms encircled and sustained me,

And said: “Now, Geryon, bestir thyself;
    The circles large, and the descent be little;
    Think of the novel burden which thou hast.”

Even as the little vessel shoves from shore,
    Backward, still backward, so he thence withdrew;
    And when he wholly felt himself afloat,

There where his breast had been he turned his tail,
    And that extended like an eel he moved,
    And with his paws drew to himself the air.

A greater fear I do not think there was
    What time abandoned Phaeton the reins,
    Whereby the heavens, as still appears, were scorched;

Nor when the wretched Icarus his flanks
    Felt stripped of feathers by the melting wax,
    His father crying, “An ill way thou takest!”

Than was my own, when I perceived myself
    On all sides in the air, and saw extinguished
    The sight of everything but of the monster.

Onward he goeth, swimming slowly, slowly;
    Wheels and descends, but I perceive it only
    By wind upon my face and from below.

I heard already on the right the whirlpool
    Making a horrible crashing under us;
    Whence I thrust out my head with eyes cast downward.

Then was I still more fearful of the abyss;
    Because I fires beheld, and heard laments,
    Whereat I, trembling, all the closer cling.

I saw then, for before I had not seen it,
    The turning and descending, by great horrors
    That were approaching upon divers sides.

As falcon who has long been on the wing,
    Who, without seeing either lure or bird,
    Maketh the falconer say, “Ah me, thou stoopest,”

Descendeth weary, whence he started swiftly,
    Thorough a hundred circles, and alights
    Far from his master, sullen and disdainful;

Even thus did Geryon place us on the bottom,
    Close to the bases of the rough-hewn rock,
    And being disencumbered of our persons,

He sped away as arrow from the string.







There is a place in Hell called Malebolge,
    Wholly of stone and of an iron colour,
    As is the circle that around it turns.

Right in the middle of the field malign
    There yawns a well exceeding wide and deep,
    Of which its place the structure will recount.

Round, then, is that enclosure which remains
    Between the well and foot of the high, hard bank,
    And has distinct in valleys ten its bottom.

As where for the protection of the walls
    Many and many moats surround the castles,
    The part in which they are a figure forms,

Just such an image those presented there;
    And as about such strongholds from their gates
    Unto the outer bank are little bridges,

So from the precipice’s base did crags
    Project, which intersected dikes and moats,
    Unto the well that truncates and collects them.

Within this place, down shaken from the back
    Of Geryon, we found us; and the Poet
    Held to the left, and I moved on behind.

Upon my right hand I beheld new anguish,
    New torments, and new wielders of the lash,
    Wherewith the foremost Bolgia was replete.

Down at the bottom were the sinners naked;
    This side the middle came they facing us,
    Beyond it, with us, but with greater steps;

Even as the Romans, for the mighty host,
    The year of Jubilee, upon the bridge,
    Have chosen a mode to pass the people over;

For all upon one side towards the Castle
    Their faces have, and go unto St. Peter’s;
    On the other side they go towards the Mountain.

This side and that, along the livid stone
    Beheld I horned demons with great scourges,
    Who cruelly were beating them behind.

Ah me! how they did make them lift their legs
    At the first blows! and sooth not any one
    The second waited for, nor for the third.

While I was going on, mine eyes by one
    Encountered were; and straight I said: “Already
    With sight of this one I am not unfed.”

Therefore I stayed my feet to make him out,
    And with me the sweet Guide came to a stand,
    And to my going somewhat back assented;

And he, the scourged one, thought to hide himself,
    Lowering his face, but little it availed him;
    For said I: “Thou that castest down thine eyes,

If false are not the features which thou bearest,
    Thou art Venedico Caccianimico;
    But what doth bring thee to such pungent sauces?”

And he to me: “Unwillingly I tell it;
    But forces me thine utterance distinct,
    Which makes me recollect the ancient world.

I was the one who the fair Ghisola
    Induced to grant the wishes of the Marquis,
    Howe’er the shameless story may be told.

Not the sole Bolognese am I who weeps here;
    Nay, rather is this place so full of them,
    That not so many tongues to-day are taught

’Twixt Reno and Savena to say ‘sipa;’
    And if thereof thou wishest pledge or proof,
    Bring to thy mind our avaricious heart.”

While speaking in this manner, with his scourge
    A demon smote him, and said: “Get thee gone
    Pander, there are no women here for coin.”

I joined myself again unto mine Escort;
    Thereafterward with footsteps few we came
    To where a crag projected from the bank.

This very easily did we ascend,
    And turning to the right along its ridge,
    From those eternal circles we departed.

When we were there, where it is hollowed out
    Beneath, to give a passage to the scourged,
    The Guide said: “Wait, and see that on thee strike

The vision of those others evil-born,
    Of whom thou hast not yet beheld the faces,
    Because together with us they have gone.”

From the old bridge we looked upon the train
    Which tow’rds us came upon the other border,
    And which the scourges in like manner smite.

And the good Master, without my inquiring,
    Said to me: “See that tall one who is coming,
    And for his pain seems not to shed a tear;

Still what a royal aspect he retains!
    That Jason is, who by his heart and cunning
    The Colchians of the Ram made destitute.

He by the isle of Lemnos passed along
    After the daring women pitiless
    Had unto death devoted all their males.

There with his tokens and with ornate words
    Did he deceive Hypsipyle, the maiden
    Who first, herself, had all the rest deceived.

There did he leave her pregnant and forlorn;
    Such sin unto such punishment condemns him,
    And also for Medea is vengeance done.

With him go those who in such wise deceive;
    And this sufficient be of the first valley
    To know, and those that in its jaws it holds.”

We were already where the narrow path
    Crosses athwart the second dike, and forms
    Of that a buttress for another arch.

Thence we heard people, who are making moan
    In the next Bolgia, snorting with their muzzles,
    And with their palms beating upon themselves

The margins were incrusted with a mould
    By exhalation from below, that sticks there,
    And with the eyes and nostrils wages war.

The bottom is so deep, no place suffices
    To give us sight of it, without ascending
    The arch’s back, where most the crag impends.

Thither we came, and thence down in the moat
    I saw a people smothered in a filth
    That out of human privies seemed to flow;

And whilst below there with mine eye I search,
    I saw one with his head so foul with ordure,
    It was not clear if he were clerk or layman.

He screamed to me: “Wherefore art thou so eager
    To look at me more than the other foul ones?”
    And I to him: “Because, if I remember,

I have already seen thee with dry hair,
    And thou’rt Alessio Interminei of Lucca;
    Therefore I eye thee more than all the others.”

And he thereon, belabouring his pumpkin:
    “The flatteries have submerged me here below,
    Wherewith my tongue was never surfeited.”

Then said to me the Guide: “See that thou thrust
    Thy visage somewhat farther in advance,
    That with thine eyes thou well the face attain

Of that uncleanly and dishevelled drab,
    Who there doth scratch herself with filthy nails,
    And crouches now, and now on foot is standing.

Thais the harlot is it, who replied
    Unto her paramour, when he said, ‘Have I
    Great gratitude from thee?’—‘Nay, marvellous;’

And herewith let our sight be satisfied.”






O Simon Magus, O forlorn disciples,
    Ye who the things of God, which ought to be
    The brides of holiness, rapaciously

For silver and for gold do prostitute,
    Now it behoves for you the trumpet sound,
    Because in this third Bolgia ye abide.

We had already on the following tomb
    Ascended to that portion of the crag
    Which o’er the middle of the moat hangs plumb.

Wisdom supreme, O how great art thou showest
    In heaven, in earth, and in the evil world,
    And with what justice doth thy power distribute!

I saw upon the sides and on the bottom
    The livid stone with perforations filled,
    All of one size, and every one was round.

To me less ample seemed they not, nor greater
    Than those that in my beautiful Saint John
    Are fashioned for the place of the baptisers,

And one of which, not many years ago,
    I broke for some one, who was drowning in it;
    Be this a seal all men to undeceive.

Out of the mouth of each one there protruded
    The feet of a transgressor, and the legs
    Up to the calf, the rest within remained.

In all of them the soles were both on fire;
    Wherefore the joints so violently quivered,
    They would have snapped asunder withes and bands.

Even as the flame of unctuous things is wont
    To move upon the outer surface only,
    So likewise was it there from heel to point.

“Master, who is that one who writhes himself,
    More than his other comrades quivering,”
    I said, “and whom a redder flame is sucking?”

And he to me: “If thou wilt have me bear thee
    Down there along that bank which lowest lies,
    From him thou’lt know his errors and himself.”

And I: “What pleases thee, to me is pleasing;
    Thou art my Lord, and knowest that I depart not
    From thy desire, and knowest what is not spoken.”

Straightway upon the fourth dike we arrived;
    We turned, and on the left-hand side descended
    Down to the bottom full of holes and narrow.

And the good Master yet from off his haunch
    Deposed me not, till to the hole he brought me
    Of him who so lamented with his shanks.

“Whoe’er thou art, that standest upside down,
    O doleful soul, implanted like a stake,”
    To say began I, “if thou canst, speak out.”

I stood even as the friar who is confessing
    The false assassin, who, when he is fixed,
    Recalls him, so that death may be delayed.

And he cried out: “Dost thou stand there already,
    Dost thou stand there already, Boniface?
    By many years the record lied to me.

Art thou so early satiate with that wealth,
    For which thou didst not fear to take by fraud
    The beautiful Lady, and then work her woe?”

Such I became, as people are who stand,
    Not comprehending what is answered them,
    As if bemocked, and know not how to answer.

Then said Virgilius: “Say to him straightway,
    ‘I am not he, I am not he thou thinkest.’”
    And I replied as was imposed on me.

Whereat the spirit writhed with both his feet,
    Then, sighing, with a voice of lamentation
    Said to me: “Then what wantest thou of me?

If who I am thou carest so much to know,
    That thou on that account hast crossed the bank,
    Know that I vested was with the great mantle;

And truly was I son of the She-bear,
    So eager to advance the cubs, that wealth
    Above, and here myself, I pocketed.

Beneath my head the others are dragged down
    Who have preceded me in simony,
    Flattened along the fissure of the rock.

Below there I shall likewise fall, whenever
    That one shall come who I believed thou wast,
    What time the sudden question I proposed.

But longer I my feet already toast,
    And here have been in this way upside down,
    Than he will planted stay with reddened feet;

For after him shall come of fouler deed
    From tow’rds the west a Pastor without law,
    Such as befits to cover him and me.

New Jason will he be, of whom we read
    In Maccabees; and as his king was pliant,
    So he who governs France shall be to this one.”

I do not know if I were here too bold,
    That him I answered only in this metre:
    “I pray thee tell me now how great a treasure

Our Lord demanded of Saint Peter first,
    Before he put the keys into his keeping?
    Truly he nothing asked but ‘Follow me.’

Nor Peter nor the rest asked of Matthias
    Silver or gold, when he by lot was chosen
    Unto the place the guilty soul had lost.

Therefore stay here, for thou art justly punished,
    And keep safe guard o’er the ill-gotten money,
    Which caused thee to be valiant against Charles.

And were it not that still forbids it me
    The reverence for the keys superlative
    Thou hadst in keeping in the gladsome life,

I would make use of words more grievous still;
    Because your avarice afflicts the world,
    Trampling the good and lifting the depraved.

The Evangelist you Pastors had in mind,
    When she who sitteth upon many waters
    To fornicate with kings by him was seen;

The same who with the seven heads was born,
    And power and strength from the ten horns received,
    So long as virtue to her spouse was pleasing.

Ye have made yourselves a god of gold and silver;
    And from the idolater how differ ye,
    Save that he one, and ye a hundred worship?

Ah, Constantine! of how much ill was mother,
    Not thy conversion, but that marriage dower
    Which the first wealthy Father took from thee!”

And while I sang to him such notes as these,
    Either that anger or that conscience stung him,
    He struggled violently with both his feet.

I think in sooth that it my Leader pleased,
    With such contented lip he listened ever
    Unto the sound of the true words expressed.

Therefore with both his arms he took me up,
    And when he had me all upon his breast,
    Remounted by the way where he descended.

Nor did he tire to have me clasped to him;
    But bore me to the summit of the arch
    Which from the fourth dike to the fifth is passage.

There tenderly he laid his burden down,
    Tenderly on the crag uneven and steep,
    That would have been hard passage for the goats:

Thence was unveiled to me another valley.







Of a new pain behoves me to make verses
    And give material to the twentieth canto
    Of the first song, which is of the submerged.

I was already thoroughly disposed
    To peer down into the uncovered depth,
    Which bathed itself with tears of agony;

And people saw I through the circular valley,
    Silent and weeping, coming at the pace
    Which in this world the Litanies assume.

As lower down my sight descended on them,
    Wondrously each one seemed to be distorted
    From chin to the beginning of the chest;

For tow’rds the reins the countenance was turned,
    And backward it behoved them to advance,
    As to look forward had been taken from them.

Perchance indeed by violence of palsy
    Some one has been thus wholly turned awry;
    But I ne’er saw it, nor believe it can be.

As God may let thee, Reader, gather fruit
    From this thy reading, think now for thyself
    How I could ever keep my face unmoistened,

When our own image near me I beheld
    Distorted so, the weeping of the eyes
    Along the fissure bathed the hinder parts.

Truly I wept, leaning upon a peak
    Of the hard crag, so that my Escort said
    To me: “Art thou, too, of the other fools?

Here pity lives when it is wholly dead;
    Who is a greater reprobate than he
    Who feels compassion at the doom divine?

Lift up, lift up thy head, and see for whom
    Opened the earth before the Thebans’ eyes;
    Wherefore they all cried: ‘Whither rushest thou,

Amphiaraus?  Why dost leave the war?’
    And downward ceased he not to fall amain
    As far as Minos, who lays hold on all.

See, he has made a bosom of his shoulders!
    Because he wished to see too far before him
    Behind he looks, and backward goes his way:

Behold Tiresias, who his semblance changed,
    When from a male a female he became,
    His members being all of them transformed;

And afterwards was forced to strike once more
    The two entangled serpents with his rod,
    Ere he could have again his manly plumes.

That Aruns is, who backs the other’s belly,
    Who in the hills of Luni, there where grubs
    The Carrarese who houses underneath,

Among the marbles white a cavern had
    For his abode; whence to behold the stars
    And sea, the view was not cut off from him.

And she there, who is covering up her breasts,
    Which thou beholdest not, with loosened tresses,
    And on that side has all the hairy skin,

Was Manto, who made quest through many lands,
    Afterwards tarried there where I was born;
    Whereof I would thou list to me a little.

After her father had from life departed,
    And the city of Bacchus had become enslaved,
    She a long season wandered through the world.

Above in beauteous Italy lies a lake
    At the Alp’s foot that shuts in Germany
    Over Tyrol, and has the name Benaco.

By a thousand springs, I think, and more, is bathed,
    ’Twixt Garda and Val Camonica, Pennino,
    With water that grows stagnant in that lake.

Midway a place is where the Trentine Pastor,
    And he of Brescia, and the Veronese
    Might give his blessing, if he passed that way.

Sitteth Peschiera, fortress fair and strong,
    To front the Brescians and the Bergamasks,
    Where round about the bank descendeth lowest.

There of necessity must fall whatever
    In bosom of Benaco cannot stay,
    And grows a river down through verdant pastures.

Soon as the water doth begin to run,
    No more Benaco is it called, but Mincio,
    Far as Governo, where it falls in Po.

Not far it runs before it finds a plain
    In which it spreads itself, and makes it marshy,
    And oft ’tis wont in summer to be sickly.

Passing that way the virgin pitiless
    Land in the middle of the fen descried,
    Untilled and naked of inhabitants;

There to escape all human intercourse,
    She with her servants stayed, her arts to practise
    And lived, and left her empty body there.

The men, thereafter, who were scattered round,
    Collected in that place, which was made strong
    By the lagoon it had on every side;

They built their city over those dead bones,
    And, after her who first the place selected,
    Mantua named it, without other omen.

Its people once within more crowded were,
    Ere the stupidity of Casalodi
    From Pinamonte had received deceit.

Therefore I caution thee, if e’er thou hearest
    Originate my city otherwise,
    No falsehood may the verity defraud.”

And I: “My Master, thy discourses are
    To me so certain, and so take my faith,
    That unto me the rest would be spent coals.

But tell me of the people who are passing,
    If any one note-worthy thou beholdest,
    For only unto that my mind reverts.”

Then said he to me: “He who from the cheek
    Thrusts out his beard upon his swarthy shoulders
    Was, at the time when Greece was void of males,

So that there scarce remained one in the cradle,
    An augur, and with Calchas gave the moment,
    In Aulis, when to sever the first cable.

Eryphylus his name was, and so sings
    My lofty Tragedy in some part or other;
    That knowest thou well, who knowest the whole of it.

The next, who is so slender in the flanks,
    Was Michael Scott, who of a verity
    Of magical illusions knew the game.

Behold Guido Bonatti, behold Asdente,
    Who now unto his leather and his thread
    Would fain have stuck, but he too late repents.

Behold the wretched ones, who left the needle,
    The spool and rock, and made them fortune-tellers;
    They wrought their magic spells with herb and image.

But come now, for already holds the confines
    Of both the hemispheres, and under Seville
    Touches the ocean-wave, Cain and the thorns,

And yesternight the moon was round already;
    Thou shouldst remember well it did not harm thee
    From time to time within the forest deep.”

Thus spake he to me, and we walked the while.







From bridge to bridge thus, speaking other things
    Of which my Comedy cares not to sing,
    We came along, and held the summit, when

We halted to behold another fissure
    Of Malebolge and other vain laments;
    And I beheld it marvellously dark.

As in the Arsenal of the Venetians
    Boils in the winter the tenacious pitch
    To smear their unsound vessels o’er again,

For sail they cannot; and instead thereof
    One makes his vessel new, and one recaulks
    The ribs of that which many a voyage has made;

One hammers at the prow, one at the stern,
    This one makes oars, and that one cordage twists,
    Another mends the mainsail and the mizzen;

Thus, not by fire, but by the art divine,
    Was boiling down below there a dense pitch
    Which upon every side the bank belimed.

I saw it, but I did not see within it
    Aught but the bubbles that the boiling raised,
    And all swell up and resubside compressed.

The while below there fixedly I gazed,
    My Leader, crying out: “Beware, beware!”
    Drew me unto himself from where I stood.

Then I turned round, as one who is impatient
    To see what it behoves him to escape,
    And whom a sudden terror doth unman,

Who, while he looks, delays not his departure;
    And I beheld behind us a black devil,
    Running along upon the crag, approach.

Ah, how ferocious was he in his aspect!
    And how he seemed to me in action ruthless,
    With open wings and light upon his feet!

His shoulders, which sharp-pointed were and high,
    A sinner did encumber with both haunches,
    And he held clutched the sinews of the feet.

From off our bridge, he said: “O Malebranche,
    Behold one of the elders of Saint Zita;
    Plunge him beneath, for I return for others

Unto that town, which is well furnished with them.
    All there are barrators, except Bonturo;
    No into Yes for money there is changed.”

He hurled him down, and over the hard crag
    Turned round, and never was a mastiff loosened
    In so much hurry to pursue a thief.

The other sank, and rose again face downward;
    But the demons, under cover of the bridge,
    Cried: “Here the Santo Volto has no place!

Here swims one otherwise than in the Serchio;
    Therefore, if for our gaffs thou wishest not,
    Do not uplift thyself above the pitch.”

They seized him then with more than a hundred rakes;
    They said: “It here behoves thee to dance covered,
    That, if thou canst, thou secretly mayest pilfer.”

Not otherwise the cooks their scullions make
    Immerse into the middle of the caldron
    The meat with hooks, so that it may not float.

Said the good Master to me: “That it be not
    Apparent thou art here, crouch thyself down
    Behind a jag, that thou mayest have some screen;

And for no outrage that is done to me
    Be thou afraid, because these things I know,
    For once before was I in such a scuffle.”

Then he passed on beyond the bridge’s head,
    And as upon the sixth bank he arrived,
    Need was for him to have a steadfast front.

With the same fury, and the same uproar,
    As dogs leap out upon a mendicant,
    Who on a sudden begs, where’er he stops,

They issued from beneath the little bridge,
    And turned against him all their grappling-irons;
    But he cried out: “Be none of you malignant!

Before those hooks of yours lay hold of me,
    Let one of you step forward, who may hear me,
    And then take counsel as to grappling me.”

They all cried out: “Let Malacoda go;”
    Whereat one started, and the rest stood still,
    And he came to him, saying: “What avails it?”

“Thinkest thou, Malacoda, to behold me
    Advanced into this place,” my Master said,
    “Safe hitherto from all your skill of fence,

Without the will divine, and fate auspicious?
    Let me go on, for it in Heaven is willed
    That I another show this savage road.”

Then was his arrogance so humbled in him,
    That he let fall his grapnel at his feet,
    And to the others said: “Now strike him not.”

And unto me my Guide: “O thou, who sittest
    Among the splinters of the bridge crouched down,
    Securely now return to me again.”

Wherefore I started and came swiftly to him;
    And all the devils forward thrust themselves,
    So that I feared they would not keep their compact.

And thus beheld I once afraid the soldiers
    Who issued under safeguard from Caprona,
    Seeing themselves among so many foes.

Close did I press myself with all my person
    Beside my Leader, and turned not mine eyes
    From off their countenance, which was not good.

They lowered their rakes, and “Wilt thou have me hit him,”
    They said to one another, “on the rump?”
    And answered: “Yes; see that thou nick him with it.”

But the same demon who was holding parley
    With my Conductor turned him very quickly,
    And said: “Be quiet, be quiet, Scarmiglione;”

Then said to us: “You can no farther go
    Forward upon this crag, because is lying
    All shattered, at the bottom, the sixth arch.

And if it still doth please you to go onward,
    Pursue your way along upon this rock;
    Near is another crag that yields a path.

Yesterday, five hours later than this hour,
    One thousand and two hundred sixty-six
    Years were complete, that here the way was broken.

I send in that direction some of mine
    To see if any one doth air himself;
    Go ye with them; for they will not be vicious.

Step forward, Alichino and Calcabrina,”
    Began he to cry out, “and thou, Cagnazzo;
    And Barbariccia, do thou guide the ten.

Come forward, Libicocco and Draghignazzo,
    And tusked Ciriatto and Graffiacane,
    And Farfarello and mad Rubicante;

Search ye all round about the boiling pitch;
    Let these be safe as far as the next crag,
    That all unbroken passes o’er the dens.”

“O me! what is it, Master, that I see?
    Pray let us go,” I said, “without an escort,
    If thou knowest how, since for myself I ask none.

If thou art as observant as thy wont is,
    Dost thou not see that they do gnash their teeth,
    And with their brows are threatening woe to us?”

And he to me: “I will not have thee fear;
    Let them gnash on, according to their fancy,
    Because they do it for those boiling wretches.”

Along the left-hand dike they wheeled about;
    But first had each one thrust his tongue between
    His teeth towards their leader for a signal;

And he had made a trumpet of his rump.






I have erewhile seen horsemen moving camp,
    Begin the storming, and their muster make,
    And sometimes starting off for their escape;

Vaunt-couriers have I seen upon your land,
    O Aretines, and foragers go forth,
    Tournaments stricken, and the joustings run,

Sometimes with trumpets and sometimes with bells,
    With kettle-drums, and signals of the castles,
    And with our own, and with outlandish things,

But never yet with bagpipe so uncouth
    Did I see horsemen move, nor infantry,
    Nor ship by any sign of land or star.

We went upon our way with the ten demons;
    Ah, savage company! but in the church
    With saints, and in the tavern with the gluttons!

Ever upon the pitch was my intent,
    To see the whole condition of that Bolgia,
    And of the people who therein were burned.

Even as the dolphins, when they make a sign
    To mariners by arching of the back,
    That they should counsel take to save their vessel,

Thus sometimes, to alleviate his pain,
    One of the sinners would display his back,
    And in less time conceal it than it lightens.

As on the brink of water in a ditch
    The frogs stand only with their muzzles out,
    So that they hide their feet and other bulk,

So upon every side the sinners stood;
    But ever as Barbariccia near them came,
    Thus underneath the boiling they withdrew.

I saw, and still my heart doth shudder at it,
    One waiting thus, even as it comes to pass
    One frog remains, and down another dives;

And Graffiacan, who most confronted him,
    Grappled him by his tresses smeared with pitch,
    And drew him up, so that he seemed an otter.

I knew, before, the names of all of them,
    So had I noted them when they were chosen,
    And when they called each other, listened how.

“O Rubicante, see that thou do lay
    Thy claws upon him, so that thou mayst flay him,”
    Cried all together the accursed ones.

And I: “My Master, see to it, if thou canst,
    That thou mayst know who is the luckless wight,
    Thus come into his adversaries’ hands.”

Near to the side of him my Leader drew,
    Asked of him whence he was; and he replied:
    “I in the kingdom of Navarre was born;

My mother placed me servant to a lord,
    For she had borne me to a ribald knave,
    Destroyer of himself and of his things.

Then I domestic was of good King Thibault;
    I set me there to practise barratry,
    For which I pay the reckoning in this heat.”

And Ciriatto, from whose mouth projected,
    On either side, a tusk, as in a boar,
    Caused him to feel how one of them could rip.

Among malicious cats the mouse had come;
    But Barbariccia clasped him in his arms,
    And said: “Stand ye aside, while I enfork him.”

And to my Master he turned round his head;
    “Ask him again,” he said, “if more thou wish
    To know from him, before some one destroy him.”

The Guide: “Now tell then of the other culprits;
    Knowest thou any one who is a Latian,
    Under the pitch?”  And he: “I separated

Lately from one who was a neighbour to it;
    Would that I still were covered up with him,
    For I should fear not either claw nor hook!”

And Libicocco: “We have borne too much;”
    And with his grapnel seized him by the arm,
    So that, by rending, he tore off a tendon.

Eke Draghignazzo wished to pounce upon him
    Down at the legs; whence their Decurion
    Turned round and round about with evil look.

When they again somewhat were pacified,
    Of him, who still was looking at his wound,
    Demanded my Conductor without stay:

“Who was that one, from whom a luckless parting
    Thou sayest thou hast made, to come ashore?”
    And he replied: “It was the Friar Gomita,

He of Gallura, vessel of all fraud,
    Who had the enemies of his Lord in hand,
    And dealt so with them each exults thereat;

Money he took, and let them smoothly off,
    As he says; and in other offices
    A barrator was he, not mean but sovereign.

Foregathers with him one Don Michael Zanche
    Of Logodoro; and of Sardinia
    To gossip never do their tongues feel tired.

O me! see that one, how he grinds his teeth;
    Still farther would I speak, but am afraid
    Lest he to scratch my itch be making ready.”

And the grand Provost, turned to Farfarello,
    Who rolled his eyes about as if to strike,
    Said: “Stand aside there, thou malicious bird.”

“If you desire either to see or hear,”
    The terror-stricken recommenced thereon,
    “Tuscans or Lombards, I will make them come.

But let the Malebranche cease a little,
    So that these may not their revenges fear,
    And I, down sitting in this very place,

For one that I am will make seven come,
    When I shall whistle, as our custom is
    To do whenever one of us comes out.”

Cagnazzo at these words his muzzle lifted,
    Shaking his head, and said: “Just hear the trick
    Which he has thought of, down to throw himself!”

Whence he, who snares in great abundance had,
    Responded: “I by far too cunning am,
    When I procure for mine a greater sadness.”

Alichin held not in, but running counter
    Unto the rest, said to him: “If thou dive,
    I will not follow thee upon the gallop,

But I will beat my wings above the pitch;
    The height be left, and be the bank a shield
    To see if thou alone dost countervail us.”

O thou who readest, thou shalt hear new sport!
    Each to the other side his eyes averted;
    He first, who most reluctant was to do it.

The Navarrese selected well his time;
    Planted his feet on land, and in a moment
    Leaped, and released himself from their design.

Whereat each one was suddenly stung with shame,
    But he most who was cause of the defeat;
    Therefore he moved, and cried: “Thou art o’ertakern.”

But little it availed, for wings could not
    Outstrip the fear; the other one went under,
    And, flying, upward he his breast directed;

Not otherwise the duck upon a sudden
    Dives under, when the falcon is approaching,
    And upward he returneth cross and weary.

Infuriate at the mockery, Calcabrina
    Flying behind him followed close, desirous
    The other should escape, to have a quarrel.

And when the barrator had disappeared,
    He turned his talons upon his companion,
    And grappled with him right above the moat.

But sooth the other was a doughty sparhawk
    To clapperclaw him well; and both of them
    Fell in the middle of the boiling pond.

A sudden intercessor was the heat;
    But ne’ertheless of rising there was naught,
    To such degree they had their wings belimed.

Lamenting with the others, Barbariccia
    Made four of them fly to the other side
    With all their gaffs, and very speedily

This side and that they to their posts descended;
    They stretched their hooks towards the pitch-ensnared,
    Who were already baked within the crust,

And in this manner busied did we leave them.







Silent, alone, and without company
    We went, the one in front, the other after,
    As go the Minor Friars along their way.

Upon the fable of Aesop was directed
    My thought, by reason of the present quarrel,
    Where he has spoken of the frog and mouse;

For ‘mo’ and ‘issa’ are not more alike
    Than this one is to that, if well we couple
    End and beginning with a steadfast mind.

And even as one thought from another springs,
    So afterward from that was born another,
    Which the first fear within me double made.

Thus did I ponder: “These on our account
    Are laughed to scorn, with injury and scoff
    So great, that much I think it must annoy them.

If anger be engrafted on ill-will,
    They will come after us more merciless
    Than dog upon the leveret which he seizes,”

I felt my hair stand all on end already
    With terror, and stood backwardly intent,
    When said I: “Master, if thou hidest not

Thyself and me forthwith, of Malebranche
    I am in dread; we have them now behind us;
    I so imagine them, I already feel them.”

And he: “If I were made of leaded glass,
    Thine outward image I should not attract
    Sooner to me than I imprint the inner.

Just now thy thoughts came in among my own,
    With similar attitude and similar face,
    So that of both one counsel sole I made.

If peradventure the right bank so slope
    That we to the next Bolgia can descend,
    We shall escape from the imagined chase.”

Not yet he finished rendering such opinion,
    When I beheld them come with outstretched wings,
    Not far remote, with will to seize upon us.

My Leader on a sudden seized me up,
    Even as a mother who by noise is wakened,
    And close beside her sees the enkindled flames,

Who takes her son, and flies, and does not stop,
    Having more care of him than of herself,
    So that she clothes her only with a shift;

And downward from the top of the hard bank
    Supine he gave him to the pendent rock,
    That one side of the other Bolgia walls.

Ne’er ran so swiftly water through a sluice
    To turn the wheel of any land-built mill,
    When nearest to the paddles it approaches,

As did my Master down along that border,
    Bearing me with him on his breast away,
    As his own son, and not as a companion.

Hardly the bed of the ravine below
    His feet had reached, ere they had reached the hill
    Right over us; but he was not afraid;

For the high Providence, which had ordained
    To place them ministers of the fifth moat,
    The power of thence departing took from all.

A painted people there below we found,
    Who went about with footsteps very slow,
    Weeping and in their semblance tired and vanquished.

They had on mantles with the hoods low down
    Before their eyes, and fashioned of the cut
    That in Cologne they for the monks are made.

Without, they gilded are so that it dazzles;
    But inwardly all leaden and so heavy
    That Frederick used to put them on of straw.

O everlastingly fatiguing mantle!
    Again we turned us, still to the left hand
    Along with them, intent on their sad plaint;

But owing to the weight, that weary folk
    Came on so tardily, that we were new
    In company at each motion of the haunch.

Whence I unto my Leader: “See thou find
    Some one who may by deed or name be known,
    And thus in going move thine eye about.”

And one, who understood the Tuscan speech,
    Cried to us from behind: “Stay ye your feet,
    Ye, who so run athwart the dusky air!

Perhaps thou’lt have from me what thou demandest.”
    Whereat the Leader turned him, and said: “Wait,
    And then according to his pace proceed.”

I stopped, and two beheld I show great haste
    Of spirit, in their faces, to be with me;
    But the burden and the narrow way delayed them.

When they came up, long with an eye askance
    They scanned me without uttering a word.
    Then to each other turned, and said together:

“He by the action of his throat seems living;
    And if they dead are, by what privilege
    Go they uncovered by the heavy stole?”

Then said to me: “Tuscan, who to the college
    Of miserable hypocrites art come,
    Do not disdain to tell us who thou art.”

And I to them: “Born was I, and grew up
    In the great town on the fair river of Arno,
    And with the body am I’ve always had.

But who are ye, in whom there trickles down
    Along your cheeks such grief as I behold?
    And what pain is upon you, that so sparkles?”

And one replied to me: “These orange cloaks
    Are made of lead so heavy, that the weights
    Cause in this way their balances to creak.

Frati Gaudenti were we, and Bolognese;
    I Catalano, and he Loderingo
    Named, and together taken by thy city,

As the wont is to take one man alone,
    For maintenance of its peace; and we were such
    That still it is apparent round Gardingo.”

“O Friars,” began I, “your iniquitous. . .”
    But said no more; for to mine eyes there rushed
    One crucified with three stakes on the ground.

When me he saw, he writhed himself all over,
    Blowing into his beard with suspirations;
    And the Friar Catalan, who noticed this,

Said to me: “This transfixed one, whom thou seest,
    Counselled the Pharisees that it was meet
    To put one man to torture for the people.

Crosswise and naked is he on the path,
    As thou perceivest; and he needs must feel,
    Whoever passes, first how much he weighs;

And in like mode his father-in-law is punished
    Within this moat, and the others of the council,
    Which for the Jews was a malignant seed.”

And thereupon I saw Virgilius marvel
    O’er him who was extended on the cross
    So vilely in eternal banishment.

Then he directed to the Friar this voice:
    “Be not displeased, if granted thee, to tell us
    If to the right hand any pass slope down

By which we two may issue forth from here,
    Without constraining some of the black angels
    To come and extricate us from this deep.”

Then he made answer: “Nearer than thou hopest
    There is a rock, that forth from the great circle
    Proceeds, and crosses all the cruel valleys,

Save that at this ’tis broken, and does not bridge it;
    You will be able to mount up the ruin,
    That sidelong slopes and at the bottom rises.”

The Leader stood awhile with head bowed down;
    Then said: “The business badly he recounted
    Who grapples with his hook the sinners yonder.”

And the Friar: “Many of the Devil’s vices
    Once heard I at Bologna, and among them,
    That he’s a liar and the father of lies.”

Thereat my Leader with great strides went on,
    Somewhat disturbed with anger in his looks;
    Whence from the heavy-laden I departed

After the prints of his beloved feet.






In that part of the youthful year wherein
    The Sun his locks beneath Aquarius tempers,
    And now the nights draw near to half the day,

What time the hoar-frost copies on the ground
    The outward semblance of her sister white,
    But little lasts the temper of her pen,

The husbandman, whose forage faileth him,
    Rises, and looks, and seeth the champaign
    All gleaming white, whereat he beats his flank,

Returns in doors, and up and down laments,
    Like a poor wretch, who knows not what to do;
    Then he returns and hope revives again,

Seeing the world has changed its countenance
    In little time, and takes his shepherd’s crook,
    And forth the little lambs to pasture drives.

Thus did the Master fill me with alarm,
    When I beheld his forehead so disturbed,
    And to the ailment came as soon the plaster.

For as we came unto the ruined bridge,
    The Leader turned to me with that sweet look
    Which at the mountain’s foot I first beheld.

His arms he opened, after some advisement
    Within himself elected, looking first
    Well at the ruin, and laid hold of me.

And even as he who acts and meditates,
    For aye it seems that he provides beforehand,
    So upward lifting me towards the summit

Of a huge rock, he scanned another crag,
    Saying: “To that one grapple afterwards,
    But try first if ’tis such that it will hold thee.”

This was no way for one clothed with a cloak;
    For hardly we, he light, and I pushed upward,
    Were able to ascend from jag to jag.

And had it not been, that upon that precinct
    Shorter was the ascent than on the other,
    He I know not, but I had been dead beat.

But because Malebolge tow’rds the mouth
    Of the profoundest well is all inclining,
    The structure of each valley doth import

That one bank rises and the other sinks.
    Still we arrived at length upon the point
    Wherefrom the last stone breaks itself asunder.

The breath was from my lungs so milked away,
    When I was up, that I could go no farther,
    Nay, I sat down upon my first arrival.

“Now it behoves thee thus to put off sloth,”
    My Master said; “for sitting upon down,
    Or under quilt, one cometh not to fame,

Withouten which whoso his life consumes
    Such vestige leaveth of himself on earth,
    As smoke in air or in the water foam.

And therefore raise thee up, o’ercome the anguish
    With spirit that o’ercometh every battle,
    If with its heavy body it sink not.

A longer stairway it behoves thee mount;
    ’Tis not enough from these to have departed;
    Let it avail thee, if thou understand me.”

Then I uprose, showing myself provided
    Better with breath than I did feel myself,
    And said: “Go on, for I am strong and bold.”

Upward we took our way along the crag,
    Which jagged was, and narrow, and difficult,
    And more precipitous far than that before.

Speaking I went, not to appear exhausted;
    Whereat a voice from the next moat came forth,
    Not well adapted to articulate words.

I know not what it said, though o’er the back
    I now was of the arch that passes there;
    But he seemed moved to anger who was speaking.

I was bent downward, but my living eyes
    Could not attain the bottom, for the dark;
    Wherefore I: “Master, see that thou arrive

At the next round, and let us descend the wall;
    For as from hence I hear and understand not,
    So I look down and nothing I distinguish.”

“Other response,” he said, “I make thee not,
    Except the doing; for the modest asking
    Ought to be followed by the deed in silence.”

We from the bridge descended at its head,
    Where it connects itself with the eighth bank,
    And then was manifest to me the Bolgia;

And I beheld therein a terrible throng
    Of serpents, and of such a monstrous kind,
    That the remembrance still congeals my blood

Let Libya boast no longer with her sand;
    For if Chelydri, Jaculi, and Phareae
    She breeds, with Cenchri and with Amphisbaena,

Neither so many plagues nor so malignant
    E’er showed she with all Ethiopia,
    Nor with whatever on the Red Sea is!

Among this cruel and most dismal throng
    People were running naked and affrighted.
    Without the hope of hole or heliotrope.

They had their hands with serpents bound behind them;
    These riveted upon their reins the tail
    And head, and were in front of them entwined.

And lo! at one who was upon our side
    There darted forth a serpent, which transfixed him
    There where the neck is knotted to the shoulders.

Nor ‘O’ so quickly e’er, nor ‘I’ was written,
    As he took fire, and burned; and ashes wholly
    Behoved it that in falling he became.

And when he on the ground was thus destroyed,
    The ashes drew together, and of themselves
    Into himself they instantly returned.

Even thus by the great sages ’tis confessed
    The phoenix dies, and then is born again,
    When it approaches its five-hundredth year;

On herb or grain it feeds not in its life,
    But only on tears of incense and amomum,
    And nard and myrrh are its last winding-sheet.

And as he is who falls, and knows not how,
    By force of demons who to earth down drag him,
    Or other oppilation that binds man,

When he arises and around him looks,
    Wholly bewildered by the mighty anguish
    Which he has suffered, and in looking sighs;

Such was that sinner after he had risen.
    Justice of God! O how severe it is,
    That blows like these in vengeance poureth down!

The Guide thereafter asked him who he was;
    Whence he replied: “I rained from Tuscany
    A short time since into this cruel gorge.

A bestial life, and not a human, pleased me,
    Even as the mule I was; I’m Vanni Fucci,
    Beast, and Pistoia was my worthy den.”

And I unto the Guide: “Tell him to stir not,
    And ask what crime has thrust him here below,
    For once a man of blood and wrath I saw him.”

And the sinner, who had heard, dissembled not,
    But unto me directed mind and face,
    And with a melancholy shame was painted.

Then said: “It pains me more that thou hast caught me
    Amid this misery where thou seest me,
    Than when I from the other life was taken.

What thou demandest I cannot deny;
    So low am I put down because I robbed
    The sacristy of the fair ornaments,

And falsely once ’twas laid upon another;
    But that thou mayst not such a sight enjoy,
    If thou shalt e’er be out of the dark places,

Thine ears to my announcement ope and hear:
    Pistoia first of Neri groweth meagre;
    Then Florence doth renew her men and manners;

Mars draws a vapour up from Val di Magra,
    Which is with turbid clouds enveloped round,
    And with impetuous and bitter tempest

Over Campo Picen shall be the battle;
    When it shall suddenly rend the mist asunder,
    So that each Bianco shall thereby be smitten.

And this I’ve said that it may give thee pain.”







At the conclusion of his words, the thief
    Lifted his hands aloft with both the figs,
    Crying: “Take that, God, for at thee I aim them.”

From that time forth the serpents were my friends;
    For one entwined itself about his neck
    As if it said: “I will not thou speak more;”

And round his arms another, and rebound him,
    Clinching itself together so in front,
    That with them he could not a motion make.

Pistoia, ah, Pistoia! why resolve not
    To burn thyself to ashes and so perish,
    Since in ill-doing thou thy seed excellest?

Through all the sombre circles of this Hell,
    Spirit I saw not against God so proud,
    Not he who fell at Thebes down from the walls!

He fled away, and spake no further word;
    And I beheld a Centaur full of rage
    Come crying out: “Where is, where is the scoffer?”

I do not think Maremma has so many
    Serpents as he had all along his back,
    As far as where our countenance begins.

Upon the shoulders, just behind the nape,
    With wings wide open was a dragon lying,
    And he sets fire to all that he encounters.

My Master said: “That one is Cacus, who
    Beneath the rock upon Mount Aventine
    Created oftentimes a lake of blood.

He goes not on the same road with his brothers,
    By reason of the fraudulent theft he made
    Of the great herd, which he had near to him;

Whereat his tortuous actions ceased beneath
    The mace of Hercules, who peradventure
    Gave him a hundred, and he felt not ten.”

While he was speaking thus, he had passed by,
    And spirits three had underneath us come,
    Of which nor I aware was, nor my Leader,

Until what time they shouted: “Who are you?”
    On which account our story made a halt,
    And then we were intent on them alone.

I did not know them; but it came to pass,
    As it is wont to happen by some chance,
    That one to name the other was compelled,

Exclaiming: “Where can Cianfa have remained?”
    Whence I, so that the Leader might attend,
    Upward from chin to nose my finger laid.

If thou art, Reader, slow now to believe
    What I shall say, it will no marvel be,
    For I who saw it hardly can admit it.

As I was holding raised on them my brows,
    Behold! a serpent with six feet darts forth
    In front of one, and fastens wholly on him.

With middle feet it bound him round the paunch,
    And with the forward ones his arms it seized;
    Then thrust its teeth through one cheek and the other;

The hindermost it stretched upon his thighs,
    And put its tail through in between the two,
    And up behind along the reins outspread it.

Ivy was never fastened by its barbs
    Unto a tree so, as this horrible reptile
    Upon the other’s limbs entwined its own.

Then they stuck close, as if of heated wax
    They had been made, and intermixed their colour;
    Nor one nor other seemed now what he was;

E’en as proceedeth on before the flame
    Upward along the paper a brown colour,
    Which is not black as yet, and the white dies.

The other two looked on, and each of them
    Cried out: “O me, Agnello, how thou changest!
    Behold, thou now art neither two nor one.”

Already the two heads had one become,
    When there appeared to us two figures mingled
    Into one face, wherein the two were lost.

Of the four lists were fashioned the two arms,
    The thighs and legs, the belly and the chest
    Members became that never yet were seen.

Every original aspect there was cancelled;
    Two and yet none did the perverted image
    Appear, and such departed with slow pace.

Even as a lizard, under the great scourge
    Of days canicular, exchanging hedge,
    Lightning appeareth if the road it cross;

Thus did appear, coming towards the bellies
    Of the two others, a small fiery serpent,
    Livid and black as is a peppercorn.

And in that part whereat is first received
    Our aliment, it one of them transfixed;
    Then downward fell in front of him extended.

The one transfixed looked at it, but said naught;
    Nay, rather with feet motionless he yawned,
    Just as if sleep or fever had assailed him.

He at the serpent gazed, and it at him;
    One through the wound, the other through the mouth
    Smoked violently, and the smoke commingled.

Henceforth be silent Lucan, where he mentions
    Wretched Sabellus and Nassidius,
    And wait to hear what now shall be shot forth.

Be silent Ovid, of Cadmus and Arethusa;
    For if him to a snake, her to fountain,
    Converts he fabling, that I grudge him not;

Because two natures never front to front
    Has he transmuted, so that both the forms
    To interchange their matter ready were.

Together they responded in such wise,
    That to a fork the serpent cleft his tail,
    And eke the wounded drew his feet together.

The legs together with the thighs themselves
    Adhered so, that in little time the juncture
    No sign whatever made that was apparent.

He with the cloven tail assumed the figure
    The other one was losing, and his skin
    Became elastic, and the other’s hard.

I saw the arms draw inward at the armpits,
    And both feet of the reptile, that were short,
    Lengthen as much as those contracted were.

Thereafter the hind feet, together twisted,
    Became the member that a man conceals,
    And of his own the wretch had two created.

While both of them the exhalation veils
    With a new colour, and engenders hair
    On one of them and depilates the other,

The one uprose and down the other fell,
    Though turning not away their impious lamps,
    Underneath which each one his muzzle changed.

He who was standing drew it tow’rds the temples,
    And from excess of matter, which came thither,
    Issued the ears from out the hollow cheeks;

What did not backward run and was retained
    Of that excess made to the face a nose,
    And the lips thickened far as was befitting.

He who lay prostrate thrusts his muzzle forward,
    And backward draws the ears into his head,
    In the same manner as the snail its horns;

And so the tongue, which was entire and apt
    For speech before, is cleft, and the bi-forked
    In the other closes up, and the smoke ceases.

The soul, which to a reptile had been changed,
    Along the valley hissing takes to flight,
    And after him the other speaking sputters.

Then did he turn upon him his new shoulders,
    And said to the other: “I’ll have Buoso run,
    Crawling as I have done, along this road.”

In this way I beheld the seventh ballast
    Shift and reshift, and here be my excuse
    The novelty, if aught my pen transgress.

And notwithstanding that mine eyes might be
    Somewhat bewildered, and my mind dismayed,
    They could not flee away so secretly

But that I plainly saw Puccio Sciancato;
    And he it was who sole of three companions,
    Which came in the beginning, was not changed;

The other was he whom thou, Gaville, weepest.







Rejoice, O Florence, since thou art so great,
    That over sea and land thou beatest thy wings,
    And throughout Hell thy name is spread abroad!

Among the thieves five citizens of thine
    Like these I found, whence shame comes unto me,
    And thou thereby to no great honour risest.

But if when morn is near our dreams are true,
    Feel shalt thou in a little time from now
    What Prato, if none other, craves for thee.

And if it now were, it were not too soon;
    Would that it were, seeing it needs must be,
    For ’twill aggrieve me more the more I age.

We went our way, and up along the stairs
    The bourns had made us to descend before,
    Remounted my Conductor and drew me.

And following the solitary path
    Among the rocks and ridges of the crag,
    The foot without the hand sped not at all.

Then sorrowed I, and sorrow now again,
    When I direct my mind to what I saw,
    And more my genius curb than I am wont,

That it may run not unless virtue guide it;
    So that if some good star, or better thing,
    Have given me good, I may myself not grudge it.

As many as the hind (who on the hill
    Rests at the time when he who lights the world
    His countenance keeps least concealed from us,

While as the fly gives place unto the gnat)
    Seeth the glow-worms down along the valley,
    Perchance there where he ploughs and makes his vintage;

With flames as manifold resplendent all
    Was the eighth Bolgia, as I grew aware
    As soon as I was where the depth appeared.

And such as he who with the bears avenged him
    Beheld Elijah’s chariot at departing,
    What time the steeds to heaven erect uprose,

For with his eye he could not follow it
    So as to see aught else than flame alone,
    Even as a little cloud ascending upward,

Thus each along the gorge of the intrenchment
    Was moving; for not one reveals the theft,
    And every flame a sinner steals away.

I stood upon the bridge uprisen to see,
    So that, if I had seized not on a rock,
    Down had I fallen without being pushed.

And the Leader, who beheld me so attent,
    Exclaimed: “Within the fires the spirits are;
    Each swathes himself with that wherewith he burns.”

“My Master,” I replied, “by hearing thee
    I am more sure; but I surmised already
    It might be so, and already wished to ask thee

Who is within that fire, which comes so cleft
    At top, it seems uprising from the pyre
    Where was Eteocles with his brother placed.”

He answered me: “Within there are tormented
    Ulysses and Diomed, and thus together
    They unto vengeance run as unto wrath.

And there within their flame do they lament
    The ambush of the horse, which made the door
    Whence issued forth the Romans’ gentle seed;

Therein is wept the craft, for which being dead
    Deidamia still deplores Achilles,
    And pain for the Palladium there is borne.”

“If they within those sparks possess the power
    To speak,” I said, “thee, Master, much I pray,
    And re-pray, that the prayer be worth a thousand,

That thou make no denial of awaiting
    Until the horned flame shall hither come;
    Thou seest that with desire I lean towards it.”

And he to me: “Worthy is thy entreaty
    Of much applause, and therefore I accept it;
    But take heed that thy tongue restrain itself.

Leave me to speak, because I have conceived
    That which thou wishest; for they might disdain
    Perchance, since they were Greeks, discourse of thine.”

When now the flame had come unto that point,
    Where to my Leader it seemed time and place,
    After this fashion did I hear him speak:

“O ye, who are twofold within one fire,
    If I deserved of you, while I was living,
    If I deserved of you or much or little

When in the world I wrote the lofty verses,
    Do not move on, but one of you declare
    Whither, being lost, he went away to die.”

Then of the antique flame the greater horn,
    Murmuring, began to wave itself about
    Even as a flame doth which the wind fatigues.

Thereafterward, the summit to and fro
    Moving as if it were the tongue that spake,
    It uttered forth a voice, and said: “When I

From Circe had departed, who concealed me
    More than a year there near unto Gaeta,
    Or ever yet Aeneas named it so,

Nor fondness for my son, nor reverence
    For my old father, nor the due affection
    Which joyous should have made Penelope,

Could overcome within me the desire
    I had to be experienced of the world,
    And of the vice and virtue of mankind;

But I put forth on the high open sea
    With one sole ship, and that small company
    By which I never had deserted been.

Both of the shores I saw as far as Spain,
    Far as Morocco, and the isle of Sardes,
    And the others which that sea bathes round about.

I and my company were old and slow
    When at that narrow passage we arrived
    Where Hercules his landmarks set as signals,

That man no farther onward should adventure.
    On the right hand behind me left I Seville,
    And on the other already had left Ceuta.

‘O brothers, who amid a hundred thousand
    Perils,’ I said, ‘have come unto the West,
    To this so inconsiderable vigil

Which is remaining of your senses still
    Be ye unwilling to deny the knowledge,
    Following the sun, of the unpeopled world.

Consider ye the seed from which ye sprang;
    Ye were not made to live like unto brutes,
    But for pursuit of virtue and of knowledge.’

So eager did I render my companions,
    With this brief exhortation, for the voyage,
    That then I hardly could have held them back.

And having turned our stern unto the morning,
    We of the oars made wings for our mad flight,
    Evermore gaining on the larboard side.

Already all the stars of the other pole
    The night beheld, and ours so very low
    It did not rise above the ocean floor.

Five times rekindled and as many quenched
    Had been the splendour underneath the moon,
    Since we had entered into the deep pass,

When there appeared to us a mountain, dim
    From distance, and it seemed to me so high
    As I had never any one beheld.

Joyful were we, and soon it turned to weeping;
    For out of the new land a whirlwind rose,
    And smote upon the fore part of the ship.

Three times it made her whirl with all the waters,
    At the fourth time it made the stern uplift,
    And the prow downward go, as pleased Another,

Until the sea above us closed again.”







Already was the flame erect and quiet,
    To speak no more, and now departed from us
    With the permission of the gentle Poet;

When yet another, which behind it came,
    Caused us to turn our eyes upon its top
    By a confused sound that issued from it.

As the Sicilian bull (that bellowed first
    With the lament of him, and that was right,
    Who with his file had modulated it)

Bellowed so with the voice of the afflicted,
    That, notwithstanding it was made of brass,
    Still it appeared with agony transfixed;

Thus, by not having any way or issue
    At first from out the fire, to its own language
    Converted were the melancholy words.

But afterwards, when they had gathered way
    Up through the point, giving it that vibration
    The tongue had given them in their passage out,

We heard it said: “O thou, at whom I aim
    My voice, and who but now wast speaking Lombard,
    Saying, ‘Now go thy way, no more I urge thee,’

Because I come perchance a little late,
    To stay and speak with me let it not irk thee;
    Thou seest it irks not me, and I am burning.

If thou but lately into this blind world
    Hast fallen down from that sweet Latian land,
    Wherefrom I bring the whole of my transgression,

Say, if the Romagnuols have peace or war,
    For I was from the mountains there between
    Urbino and the yoke whence Tiber bursts.”

I still was downward bent and listening,
    When my Conductor touched me on the side,
    Saying: “Speak thou: this one a Latian is.”

And I, who had beforehand my reply
    In readiness, forthwith began to speak:
    “O soul, that down below there art concealed,

Romagna thine is not and never has been
    Without war in the bosom of its tyrants;
    But open war I none have left there now.

Ravenna stands as it long years has stood;
    The Eagle of Polenta there is brooding,
    So that she covers Cervia with her vans.

The city which once made the long resistance,
    And of the French a sanguinary heap,
    Beneath the Green Paws finds itself again;

Verrucchio’s ancient Mastiff and the new,
    Who made such bad disposal of Montagna,
    Where they are wont make wimbles of their teeth.

The cities of Lamone and Santerno
    Governs the Lioncel of the white lair,
    Who changes sides ’twixt summer-time and winter;

And that of which the Savio bathes the flank,
    Even as it lies between the plain and mountain,
    Lives between tyranny and a free state.

Now I entreat thee tell us who thou art;
    Be not more stubborn than the rest have been,
    So may thy name hold front there in the world.”

After the fire a little more had roared
    In its own fashion, the sharp point it moved
    This way and that, and then gave forth such breath:

“If I believed that my reply were made
    To one who to the world would e’er return,
    This flame without more flickering would stand still;

But inasmuch as never from this depth
    Did any one return, if I hear true,
    Without the fear of infamy I answer,

I was a man of arms, then Cordelier,
    Believing thus begirt to make amends;
    And truly my belief had been fulfilled

But for the High Priest, whom may ill betide,
    Who put me back into my former sins;
    And how and wherefore I will have thee hear.

While I was still the form of bone and pulp
    My mother gave to me, the deeds I did
    Were not those of a lion, but a fox.

The machinations and the covert ways
    I knew them all, and practised so their craft,
    That to the ends of earth the sound went forth.

When now unto that portion of mine age
    I saw myself arrived, when each one ought
    To lower the sails, and coil away the ropes,

That which before had pleased me then displeased me;
    And penitent and confessing I surrendered,
    Ah woe is me! and it would have bestead me;

The Leader of the modern Pharisees
    Having a war near unto Lateran,
    And not with Saracens nor with the Jews,

For each one of his enemies was Christian,
    And none of them had been to conquer Acre,
    Nor merchandising in the Sultan’s land,

Nor the high office, nor the sacred orders,
    In him regarded, nor in me that cord
    Which used to make those girt with it more meagre;

But even as Constantine sought out Sylvester
    To cure his leprosy, within Soracte,
    So this one sought me out as an adept

To cure him of the fever of his pride.
    Counsel he asked of me, and I was silent,
    Because his words appeared inebriate.

And then he said: ‘Be not thy heart afraid;
    Henceforth I thee absolve; and thou instruct me
    How to raze Palestrina to the ground.

Heaven have I power to lock and to unlock,
    As thou dost know; therefore the keys are two,
    The which my predecessor held not dear.’

Then urged me on his weighty arguments
    There, where my silence was the worst advice;
    And said I: ‘Father, since thou washest me

Of that sin into which I now must fall,
    The promise long with the fulfilment short
    Will make thee triumph in thy lofty seat.’

Francis came afterward, when I was dead,
    For me; but one of the black Cherubim
    Said to him: ‘Take him not; do me no wrong;

He must come down among my servitors,
    Because he gave the fraudulent advice
    From which time forth I have been at his hair;

For who repents not cannot be absolved,
    Nor can one both repent and will at once,
    Because of the contradiction which consents not.’

O miserable me! how I did shudder
    When he seized on me, saying: ‘Peradventure
    Thou didst not think that I was a logician!’

He bore me unto Minos, who entwined
    Eight times his tail about his stubborn back,
    And after he had bitten it in great rage,

Said: ‘Of the thievish fire a culprit this;’
    Wherefore, here where thou seest, am I lost,
    And vested thus in going I bemoan me.”

When it had thus completed its recital,
    The flame departed uttering lamentations,
    Writhing and flapping its sharp-pointed horn.

Onward we passed, both I and my Conductor,
    Up o’er the crag above another arch,
    Which the moat covers, where is paid the fee

By those who, sowing discord, win their burden.







Who ever could, e’en with untrammelled words,
    Tell of the blood and of the wounds in full
    Which now I saw, by many times narrating?

Each tongue would for a certainty fall short
    By reason of our speech and memory,
    That have small room to comprehend so much.

If were again assembled all the people
    Which formerly upon the fateful land
    Of Puglia were lamenting for their blood

Shed by the Romans and the lingering war
    That of the rings made such illustrious spoils,
    As Livy has recorded, who errs not,

With those who felt the agony of blows
    By making counterstand to Robert Guiscard,
    And all the rest, whose bones are gathered still

At Ceperano, where a renegade
    Was each Apulian, and at Tagliacozzo,
    Where without arms the old Alardo conquered,

And one his limb transpierced, and one lopped off,
    Should show, it would be nothing to compare
    With the disgusting mode of the ninth Bolgia.

A cask by losing centre-piece or cant
    Was never shattered so, as I saw one
    Rent from the chin to where one breaketh wind.

Between his legs were hanging down his entrails;
    His heart was visible, and the dismal sack
    That maketh excrement of what is eaten.

While I was all absorbed in seeing him,
    He looked at me, and opened with his hands
    His bosom, saying: “See now how I rend me;

How mutilated, see, is Mahomet;
    In front of me doth Ali weeping go,
    Cleft in the face from forelock unto chin;

And all the others whom thou here beholdest,
    Disseminators of scandal and of schism
    While living were, and therefore are cleft thus.

A devil is behind here, who doth cleave us
    Thus cruelly, unto the falchion’s edge
    Putting again each one of all this ream,

When we have gone around the doleful road;
    By reason that our wounds are closed again
    Ere any one in front of him repass.

But who art thou, that musest on the crag,
    Perchance to postpone going to the pain
    That is adjudged upon thine accusations?”

“Nor death hath reached him yet, nor guilt doth bring him,”
    My Master made reply, “to be tormented;
    But to procure him full experience,

Me, who am dead, behoves it to conduct him
    Down here through Hell, from circle unto circle;
    And this is true as that I speak to thee.”

More than a hundred were there when they heard him,
    Who in the moat stood still to look at me,
    Through wonderment oblivious of their torture.

“Now say to Fra Dolcino, then, to arm him,
    Thou, who perhaps wilt shortly see the sun,
    If soon he wish not here to follow me,

So with provisions, that no stress of snow
    May give the victory to the Novarese,
    Which otherwise to gain would not be easy.”

After one foot to go away he lifted,
    This word did Mahomet say unto me,
    Then to depart upon the ground he stretched it.

Another one, who had his throat pierced through,
    And nose cut off close underneath the brows,
    And had no longer but a single ear,

Staying to look in wonder with the others,
    Before the others did his gullet open,
    Which outwardly was red in every part,

And said: “O thou, whom guilt doth not condemn,
    And whom I once saw up in Latian land,
    Unless too great similitude deceive me,

Call to remembrance Pier da Medicina,
    If e’er thou see again the lovely plain
    That from Vercelli slopes to Marcabo,

And make it known to the best two of Fano,
    To Messer Guido and Angiolello likewise,
    That if foreseeing here be not in vain,

Cast over from their vessel shall they be,
    And drowned near unto the Cattolica,
    By the betrayal of a tyrant fell.

Between the isles of Cyprus and Majorca
    Neptune ne’er yet beheld so great a crime,
    Neither of pirates nor Argolic people.

That traitor, who sees only with one eye,
    And holds the land, which some one here with me
    Would fain be fasting from the vision of,

Will make them come unto a parley with him;
    Then will do so, that to Focara’s wind
    They will not stand in need of vow or prayer.”

And I to him: “Show to me and declare,
    If thou wouldst have me bear up news of thee,
    Who is this person of the bitter vision.”

Then did he lay his hand upon the jaw
    Of one of his companions, and his mouth
    Oped, crying: “This is he, and he speaks not.

This one, being banished, every doubt submerged
    In Caesar by affirming the forearmed
    Always with detriment allowed delay.”

O how bewildered unto me appeared,
    With tongue asunder in his windpipe slit,
    Curio, who in speaking was so bold!

And one, who both his hands dissevered had,
    The stumps uplifting through the murky air,
    So that the blood made horrible his face,

Cried out: “Thou shalt remember Mosca also,
    Who said, alas! ‘A thing done has an end!’
    Which was an ill seed for the Tuscan people.”

“And death unto thy race,” thereto I added;
    Whence he, accumulating woe on woe,
    Departed, like a person sad and crazed.

But I remained to look upon the crowd;
    And saw a thing which I should be afraid,
    Without some further proof, even to recount,

If it were not that conscience reassures me,
    That good companion which emboldens man
    Beneath the hauberk of its feeling pure.

I truly saw, and still I seem to see it,
    A trunk without a head walk in like manner
    As walked the others of the mournful herd.

And by the hair it held the head dissevered,
    Hung from the hand in fashion of a lantern,
    And that upon us gazed and said: “O me!”

It of itself made to itself a lamp,
    And they were two in one, and one in two;
    How that can be, He knows who so ordains it.

When it was come close to the bridge’s foot,
    It lifted high its arm with all the head,
    To bring more closely unto us its words,

Which were: “Behold now the sore penalty,
    Thou, who dost breathing go the dead beholding;
    Behold if any be as great as this.

And so that thou may carry news of me,
    Know that Bertram de Born am I, the same
    Who gave to the Young King the evil comfort.

I made the father and the son rebellious;
    Achitophel not more with Absalom
    And David did with his accursed goadings.

Because I parted persons so united,
    Parted do I now bear my brain, alas!
    From its beginning, which is in this trunk.

Thus is observed in me the counterpoise.”







The many people and the divers wounds
    These eyes of mine had so inebriated,
    That they were wishful to stand still and weep;

But said Virgilius: “What dost thou still gaze at?
    Why is thy sight still riveted down there
    Among the mournful, mutilated shades?

Thou hast not done so at the other Bolge;
    Consider, if to count them thou believest,
    That two-and-twenty miles the valley winds,

And now the moon is underneath our feet;
    Henceforth the time allotted us is brief,
    And more is to be seen than what thou seest.”

“If thou hadst,” I made answer thereupon,
    “Attended to the cause for which I looked,
    Perhaps a longer stay thou wouldst have pardoned.”

Meanwhile my Guide departed, and behind him
    I went, already making my reply,
    And superadding: “In that cavern where

I held mine eyes with such attention fixed,
    I think a spirit of my blood laments
    The sin which down below there costs so much.”

Then said the Master: “Be no longer broken
    Thy thought from this time forward upon him;
    Attend elsewhere, and there let him remain;

For him I saw below the little bridge,
    Pointing at thee, and threatening with his finger
    Fiercely, and heard him called Geri del Bello.

So wholly at that time wast thou impeded
    By him who formerly held Altaforte,
    Thou didst not look that way; so he departed.”

“O my Conductor, his own violent death,
    Which is not yet avenged for him,” I said,
    “By any who is sharer in the shame,

Made him disdainful; whence he went away,
    As I imagine, without speaking to me,
    And thereby made me pity him the more.”

Thus did we speak as far as the first place
    Upon the crag, which the next valley shows
    Down to the bottom, if there were more light.

When we were now right over the last cloister
    Of Malebolge, so that its lay-brothers
    Could manifest themselves unto our sight,

Divers lamentings pierced me through and through,
    Which with compassion had their arrows barbed,
    Whereat mine ears I covered with my hands.

What pain would be, if from the hospitals
    Of Valdichiana, ’twixt July and September,
    And of Maremma and Sardinia

All the diseases in one moat were gathered,
    Such was it here, and such a stench came from it
    As from putrescent limbs is wont to issue.

We had descended on the furthest bank
    From the long crag, upon the left hand still,
    And then more vivid was my power of sight

Down tow’rds the bottom, where the ministress
    Of the high Lord, Justice infallible,
    Punishes forgers, which she here records.

I do not think a sadder sight to see
    Was in Aegina the whole people sick,
    (When was the air so full of pestilence,

The animals, down to the little worm,
    All fell, and afterwards the ancient people,
    According as the poets have affirmed,

Were from the seed of ants restored again,)
    Than was it to behold through that dark valley
    The spirits languishing in divers heaps.

This on the belly, that upon the back
    One of the other lay, and others crawling
    Shifted themselves along the dismal road.

We step by step went onward without speech,
    Gazing upon and listening to the sick
    Who had not strength enough to lift their bodies.

I saw two sitting leaned against each other,
    As leans in heating platter against platter,
    From head to foot bespotted o’er with scabs;

And never saw I plied a currycomb
    By stable-boy for whom his master waits,
    Or him who keeps awake unwillingly,

As every one was plying fast the bite
    Of nails upon himself, for the great rage
    Of itching which no other succour had.

And the nails downward with them dragged the scab,
    In fashion as a knife the scales of bream,
    Or any other fish that has them largest.

“O thou, that with thy fingers dost dismail thee,”
    Began my Leader unto one of them,
    “And makest of them pincers now and then,

Tell me if any Latian is with those
    Who are herein; so may thy nails suffice thee
    To all eternity unto this work.”

“Latians are we, whom thou so wasted seest,
    Both of us here,” one weeping made reply;
    “But who art thou, that questionest about us?”

And said the Guide: “One am I who descends
    Down with this living man from cliff to cliff,
    And I intend to show Hell unto him.”

Then broken was their mutual support,
    And trembling each one turned himself to me,
    With others who had heard him by rebound.

Wholly to me did the good Master gather,
    Saying: “Say unto them whate’er thou wishest.”
    And I began, since he would have it so:

“So may your memory not steal away
    In the first world from out the minds of men,
    But so may it survive ’neath many suns,

Say to me who ye are, and of what people;
    Let not your foul and loathsome punishment
    Make you afraid to show yourselves to me.”

“I of Arezzo was,” one made reply,
    “And Albert of Siena had me burned;
    But what I died for does not bring me here.

’Tis true I said to him, speaking in jest,
    That I could rise by flight into the air,
    And he who had conceit, but little wit,

Would have me show to him the art; and only
    Because no Daedalus I made him, made me
    Be burned by one who held him as his son.

But unto the last Bolgia of the ten,
    For alchemy, which in the world I practised,
    Minos, who cannot err, has me condemned.”

And to the Poet said I: “Now was ever
    So vain a people as the Sienese?
    Not for a certainty the French by far.”

Whereat the other leper, who had heard me,
    Replied unto my speech: “Taking out Stricca,
    Who knew the art of moderate expenses,

And Niccolo, who the luxurious use
    Of cloves discovered earliest of all
    Within that garden where such seed takes root;

And taking out the band, among whom squandered
    Caccia d’Ascian his vineyards and vast woods,
    And where his wit the Abbagliato proffered!

But, that thou know who thus doth second thee
    Against the Sienese, make sharp thine eye
    Tow’rds me, so that my face well answer thee,

And thou shalt see I am Capocchio’s shade,
    Who metals falsified by alchemy;
    Thou must remember, if I well descry thee,

How I a skilful ape of nature was.”







’Twas at the time when Juno was enraged,
    For Semele, against the Theban blood,
    As she already more than once had shown,

So reft of reason Athamas became,
    That, seeing his own wife with children twain
    Walking encumbered upon either hand,

He cried: “Spread out the nets, that I may take
    The lioness and her whelps upon the passage;”
    And then extended his unpitying claws,

Seizing the first, who had the name Learchus,
    And whirled him round, and dashed him on a rock;
    And she, with the other burthen, drowned herself;—

And at the time when fortune downward hurled
    The Trojan’s arrogance, that all things dared,
    So that the king was with his kingdom crushed,

Hecuba sad, disconsolate, and captive,
    When lifeless she beheld Polyxena,
    And of her Polydorus on the shore

Of ocean was the dolorous one aware,
    Out of her senses like a dog she barked,
    So much the anguish had her mind distorted;

But not of Thebes the furies nor the Trojan
    Were ever seen in any one so cruel
    In goading beasts, and much more human members,

As I beheld two shadows pale and naked,
    Who, biting, in the manner ran along
    That a boar does, when from the sty turned loose.

One to Capocchio came, and by the nape
    Seized with its teeth his neck, so that in dragging
    It made his belly grate the solid bottom.

And the Aretine, who trembling had remained,
    Said to me: “That mad sprite is Gianni Schicchi,
    And raving goes thus harrying other people.”

“O,” said I to him, “so may not the other
    Set teeth on thee, let it not weary thee
    To tell us who it is, ere it dart hence.”

And he to me: “That is the ancient ghost
    Of the nefarious Myrrha, who became
    Beyond all rightful love her father’s lover.

She came to sin with him after this manner,
    By counterfeiting of another’s form;
    As he who goeth yonder undertook,

That he might gain the lady of the herd,
    To counterfeit in himself Buoso Donati,
    Making a will and giving it due form.”

And after the two maniacs had passed
    On whom I held mine eye, I turned it back
    To look upon the other evil-born.

I saw one made in fashion of a lute,
    If he had only had the groin cut off
    Just at the point at which a man is forked.

The heavy dropsy, that so disproportions
    The limbs with humours, which it ill concocts,
    That the face corresponds not to the belly,

Compelled him so to hold his lips apart
    As does the hectic, who because of thirst
    One tow’rds the chin, the other upward turns.

“O ye, who without any torment are,
    And why I know not, in the world of woe,”
    He said to us, “behold, and be attentive

Unto the misery of Master Adam;
    I had while living much of what I wished,
    And now, alas! a drop of water crave.

The rivulets, that from the verdant hills
    Of Cassentin descend down into Arno,
    Making their channels to be cold and moist,

Ever before me stand, and not in vain;
    For far more doth their image dry me up
    Than the disease which strips my face of flesh.

The rigid justice that chastises me
    Draweth occasion from the place in which
    I sinned, to put the more my sighs in flight.

There is Romena, where I counterfeited
    The currency imprinted with the Baptist,
    For which I left my body burned above.

But if I here could see the tristful soul
    Of Guido, or Alessandro, or their brother,
    For Branda’s fount I would not give the sight.

One is within already, if the raving
    Shades that are going round about speak truth;
    But what avails it me, whose limbs are tied?

If I were only still so light, that in
    A hundred years I could advance one inch,
    I had already started on the way,

Seeking him out among this squalid folk,
    Although the circuit be eleven miles,
    And be not less than half a mile across.

For them am I in such a family;
    They did induce me into coining florins,
    Which had three carats of impurity.”

And I to him: “Who are the two poor wretches
    That smoke like unto a wet hand in winter,
    Lying there close upon thy right-hand confines?”

“I found them here,” replied he, “when I rained
    Into this chasm, and since they have not turned,
    Nor do I think they will for evermore.

One the false woman is who accused Joseph,
    The other the false Sinon, Greek of Troy;
    From acute fever they send forth such reek.”

And one of them, who felt himself annoyed
    At being, peradventure, named so darkly,
    Smote with the fist upon his hardened paunch.

It gave a sound, as if it were a drum;
    And Master Adam smote him in the face,
    With arm that did not seem to be less hard,

Saying to him: “Although be taken from me
    All motion, for my limbs that heavy are,
    I have an arm unfettered for such need.”

Whereat he answer made: “When thou didst go
    Unto the fire, thou hadst it not so ready:
    But hadst it so and more when thou wast coining.”

The dropsical: “Thou sayest true in that;
    But thou wast not so true a witness there,
    Where thou wast questioned of the truth at Troy.”

“If I spake false, thou falsifiedst the coin,”
    Said Sinon; “and for one fault I am here,
    And thou for more than any other demon.”

“Remember, perjurer, about the horse,”
    He made reply who had the swollen belly,
    “And rueful be it thee the whole world knows it.”

“Rueful to thee the thirst be wherewith cracks
    Thy tongue,” the Greek said, “and the putrid water
    That hedges so thy paunch before thine eyes.”

Then the false-coiner: “So is gaping wide
    Thy mouth for speaking evil, as ’tis wont;
    Because if I have thirst, and humour stuff me

Thou hast the burning and the head that aches,
    And to lick up the mirror of Narcissus
    Thou wouldst not want words many to invite thee.”

In listening to them was I wholly fixed,
    When said the Master to me: “Now just look,
    For little wants it that I quarrel with thee.”

When him I heard in anger speak to me,
    I turned me round towards him with such shame
    That still it eddies through my memory.

And as he is who dreams of his own harm,
    Who dreaming wishes it may be a dream,
    So that he craves what is, as if it were not;

Such I became, not having power to speak,
    For to excuse myself I wished, and still
    Excused myself, and did not think I did it.

“Less shame doth wash away a greater fault,”
    The Master said, “than this of thine has been;
    Therefore thyself disburden of all sadness,

And make account that I am aye beside thee,
    If e’er it come to pass that fortune bring thee
    Where there are people in a like dispute;

For a base wish it is to wish to hear it.”






One and the selfsame tongue first wounded me,
    So that it tinged the one cheek and the other,
    And then held out to me the medicine;

Thus do I hear that once Achilles’ spear,
    His and his father’s, used to be the cause
    First of a sad and then a gracious boon.

We turned our backs upon the wretched valley,
    Upon the bank that girds it round about,
    Going across it without any speech.

There it was less than night, and less than day,
    So that my sight went little in advance;
    But I could hear the blare of a loud horn,

So loud it would have made each thunder faint,
    Which, counter to it following its way,
    Mine eyes directed wholly to one place.

After the dolorous discomfiture
    When Charlemagne the holy emprise lost,
    So terribly Orlando sounded not.

Short while my head turned thitherward I held
    When many lofty towers I seemed to see,
    Whereat I: “Master, say, what town is this?”

And he to me: “Because thou peerest forth
    Athwart the darkness at too great a distance,
    It happens that thou errest in thy fancy.

Well shalt thou see, if thou arrivest there,
    How much the sense deceives itself by distance;
    Therefore a little faster spur thee on.”

Then tenderly he took me by the hand,
    And said: “Before we farther have advanced,
    That the reality may seem to thee

Less strange, know that these are not towers, but giants,
    And they are in the well, around the bank,
    From navel downward, one and all of them.”

As, when the fog is vanishing away,
    Little by little doth the sight refigure
    Whate’er the mist that crowds the air conceals,

So, piercing through the dense and darksome air,
    More and more near approaching tow’rd the verge,
    My error fled, and fear came over me;

Because as on its circular parapets
    Montereggione crowns itself with towers,
    E’en thus the margin which surrounds the well

With one half of their bodies turreted
    The horrible giants, whom Jove menaces
    E’en now from out the heavens when he thunders.

And I of one already saw the face,
    Shoulders, and breast, and great part of the belly,
    And down along his sides both of the arms.

Certainly Nature, when she left the making
    Of animals like these, did well indeed,
    By taking such executors from Mars;

And if of elephants and whales she doth not
    Repent her, whosoever looketh subtly
    More just and more discreet will hold her for it;

For where the argument of intellect
    Is added unto evil will and power,
    No rampart can the people make against it.

His face appeared to me as long and large
    As is at Rome the pine-cone of Saint Peter’s,
    And in proportion were the other bones;

So that the margin, which an apron was
    Down from the middle, showed so much of him
    Above it, that to reach up to his hair

Three Frieslanders in vain had vaunted them;
    For I beheld thirty great palms of him
    Down from the place where man his mantle buckles.

“Raphael mai amech izabi almi,”
    Began to clamour the ferocious mouth,
    To which were not befitting sweeter psalms.

And unto him my Guide: “Soul idiotic,
    Keep to thy horn, and vent thyself with that,
    When wrath or other passion touches thee.

Search round thy neck, and thou wilt find the belt
    Which keeps it fastened, O bewildered soul,
    And see it, where it bars thy mighty breast.”

Then said to me: “He doth himself accuse;
    This one is Nimrod, by whose evil thought
    One language in the world is not still used.

Here let us leave him and not speak in vain;
    For even such to him is every language
    As his to others, which to none is known.”

Therefore a longer journey did we make,
    Turned to the left, and a crossbow-shot oft
    We found another far more fierce and large.

In binding him, who might the master be
    I cannot say; but he had pinioned close
    Behind the right arm, and in front the other,

With chains, that held him so begirt about
    From the neck down, that on the part uncovered
    It wound itself as far as the fifth gyre.

“This proud one wished to make experiment
    Of his own power against the Supreme Jove,”
    My Leader said, “whence he has such a guerdon.

Ephialtes is his name; he showed great prowess.
    What time the giants terrified the gods;
    The arms he wielded never more he moves.”

And I to him: “If possible, I should wish
    That of the measureless Briareus
    These eyes of mine might have experience.”

Whence he replied: “Thou shalt behold Antaeus
    Close by here, who can speak and is unbound,
    Who at the bottom of all crime shall place us.

Much farther yon is he whom thou wouldst see,
    And he is bound, and fashioned like to this one,
    Save that he seems in aspect more ferocious.”

There never was an earthquake of such might
    That it could shake a tower so violently,
    As Ephialtes suddenly shook himself.

Then was I more afraid of death than ever,
    For nothing more was needful than the fear,
    If I had not beheld the manacles.

Then we proceeded farther in advance,
    And to Antaeus came, who, full five ells
    Without the head, forth issued from the cavern.

“O thou, who in the valley fortunate,
    Which Scipio the heir of glory made,
    When Hannibal turned back with all his hosts,

Once brought’st a thousand lions for thy prey,
    And who, hadst thou been at the mighty war
    Among thy brothers, some it seems still think

The sons of Earth the victory would have gained:
    Place us below, nor be disdainful of it,
    There where the cold doth lock Cocytus up.

Make us not go to Tityus nor Typhoeus;
    This one can give of that which here is longed for;
    Therefore stoop down, and do not curl thy lip.

Still in the world can he restore thy fame;
    Because he lives, and still expects long life,
    If to itself Grace call him not untimely.”

So said the Master; and in haste the other
    His hands extended and took up my Guide,—
    Hands whose great pressure Hercules once felt.

Virgilius, when he felt himself embraced,
    Said unto me: “Draw nigh, that I may take thee;”
    Then of himself and me one bundle made.

As seems the Carisenda, to behold
    Beneath the leaning side, when goes a cloud
    Above it so that opposite it hangs;

Such did Antaeus seem to me, who stood
    Watching to see him stoop, and then it was
    I could have wished to go some other way.

But lightly in the abyss, which swallows up
    Judas with Lucifer, he put us down;
    Nor thus bowed downward made he there delay,

But, as a mast does in a ship, uprose.







If I had rhymes both rough and stridulous,
    As were appropriate to the dismal hole
    Down upon which thrust all the other rocks,

I would press out the juice of my conception
    More fully; but because I have them not,
    Not without fear I bring myself to speak;

For ’tis no enterprise to take in jest,
    To sketch the bottom of all the universe,
    Nor for a tongue that cries Mamma and Babbo.

But may those Ladies help this verse of mine,
    Who helped Amphion in enclosing Thebes,
    That from the fact the word be not diverse.

O rabble ill-begotten above all,
    Who’re in the place to speak of which is hard,
    ’Twere better ye had here been sheep or goats!

When we were down within the darksome well,
    Beneath the giant’s feet, but lower far,
    And I was scanning still the lofty wall,

I heard it said to me: “Look how thou steppest!
    Take heed thou do not trample with thy feet
    The heads of the tired, miserable brothers!”

Whereat I turned me round, and saw before me
    And underfoot a lake, that from the frost
    The semblance had of glass, and not of water.

So thick a veil ne’er made upon its current
    In winter-time Danube in Austria,
    Nor there beneath the frigid sky the Don,

As there was here; so that if Tambernich
    Had fallen upon it, or Pietrapana,
    E’en at the edge ’twould not have given a creak.

And as to croak the frog doth place himself
    With muzzle out of water,—when is dreaming
    Of gleaning oftentimes the peasant-girl,—

Livid, as far down as where shame appears,
    Were the disconsolate shades within the ice,
    Setting their teeth unto the note of storks.

Each one his countenance held downward bent;
    From mouth the cold, from eyes the doleful heart
    Among them witness of itself procures.

When round about me somewhat I had looked,
    I downward turned me, and saw two so close,
    The hair upon their heads together mingled.

“Ye who so strain your breasts together, tell me,”
    I said, “who are you;” and they bent their necks,
    And when to me their faces they had lifted,

Their eyes, which first were only moist within,
    Gushed o’er the eyelids, and the frost congealed
    The tears between, and locked them up again.

Clamp never bound together wood with wood
    So strongly; whereat they, like two he-goats,
    Butted together, so much wrath o’ercame them.

And one, who had by reason of the cold
    Lost both his ears, still with his visage downward,
    Said: “Why dost thou so mirror thyself in us?

If thou desire to know who these two are,
    The valley whence Bisenzio descends
    Belonged to them and to their father Albert.

They from one body came, and all Caina
    Thou shalt search through, and shalt not find a shade
    More worthy to be fixed in gelatine;

Not he in whom were broken breast and shadow
    At one and the same blow by Arthur’s hand;
    Focaccia not; not he who me encumbers

So with his head I see no farther forward,
    And bore the name of Sassol Mascheroni;
    Well knowest thou who he was, if thou art Tuscan.

And that thou put me not to further speech,
    Know that I Camicion de’ Pazzi was,
    And wait Carlino to exonerate me.”

Then I beheld a thousand faces, made
    Purple with cold; whence o’er me comes a shudder,
    And evermore will come, at frozen ponds.

And while we were advancing tow’rds the middle,
    Where everything of weight unites together,
    And I was shivering in the eternal shade,

Whether ’twere will, or destiny, or chance,
    I know not; but in walking ’mong the heads
    I struck my foot hard in the face of one.

Weeping he growled: “Why dost thou trample me?
    Unless thou comest to increase the vengeance
    of Montaperti, why dost thou molest me?”

And I: “My Master, now wait here for me,
    That I through him may issue from a doubt;
    Then thou mayst hurry me, as thou shalt wish.”

The Leader stopped; and to that one I said
    Who was blaspheming vehemently still:
    “Who art thou, that thus reprehendest others?”

“Now who art thou, that goest through Antenora
    Smiting,” replied he, “other people’s cheeks,
    So that, if thou wert living, ’twere too much?”

“Living I am, and dear to thee it may be,”
    Was my response, “if thou demandest fame,
    That ’mid the other notes thy name I place.”

And he to me: “For the reverse I long;
    Take thyself hence, and give me no more trouble;
    For ill thou knowest to flatter in this hollow.”

Then by the scalp behind I seized upon him,
    And said: “It must needs be thou name thyself,
    Or not a hair remain upon thee here.”

Whence he to me: “Though thou strip off my hair,
    I will not tell thee who I am, nor show thee,
    If on my head a thousand times thou fall.”

I had his hair in hand already twisted,
    And more than one shock of it had pulled out,
    He barking, with his eyes held firmly down,

When cried another: “What doth ail thee, Bocca?
    Is’t not enough to clatter with thy jaws,
    But thou must bark? what devil touches thee?”

“Now,” said I, “I care not to have thee speak,
    Accursed traitor; for unto thy shame
    I will report of thee veracious news.”

“Begone,” replied he, “and tell what thou wilt,
    But be not silent, if thou issue hence,
    Of him who had just now his tongue so prompt;

He weepeth here the silver of the French;
    ‘I saw,’ thus canst thou phrase it, ‘him of Duera
    There where the sinners stand out in the cold.’

If thou shouldst questioned be who else was there,
    Thou hast beside thee him of Beccaria,
    Of whom the gorget Florence slit asunder;

Gianni del Soldanier, I think, may be
    Yonder with Ganellon, and Tebaldello
    Who oped Faenza when the people slep.”

Already we had gone away from him,
    When I beheld two frozen in one hole,
    So that one head a hood was to the other;

And even as bread through hunger is devoured,
    The uppermost on the other set his teeth,
    There where the brain is to the nape united.

Not in another fashion Tydeus gnawed
    The temples of Menalippus in disdain,
    Than that one did the skull and the other things.

“O thou, who showest by such bestial sign
    Thy hatred against him whom thou art eating,
    Tell me the wherefore,” said I, “with this compact,

That if thou rightfully of him complain,
    In knowing who ye are, and his transgression,
    I in the world above repay thee for it,

If that wherewith I speak be not dried up.”







His mouth uplifted from his grim repast,
    That sinner, wiping it upon the hair
    Of the same head that he behind had wasted.

Then he began: “Thou wilt that I renew
    The desperate grief, which wrings my heart already
    To think of only, ere I speak of it;

But if my words be seed that may bear fruit
    Of infamy to the traitor whom I gnaw,
    Speaking and weeping shalt thou see together.

I know not who thou art, nor by what mode
    Thou hast come down here; but a Florentine
    Thou seemest to me truly, when I hear thee.

Thou hast to know I was Count Ugolino,
    And this one was Ruggieri the Archbishop;
    Now I will tell thee why I am such a neighbour.

That, by effect of his malicious thoughts,
    Trusting in him I was made prisoner,
    And after put to death, I need not say;

 But ne’ertheless what thou canst not have heard,
    That is to say, how cruel was my death,
    Hear shalt thou, and shalt know if he has wronged me.

A narrow perforation in the mew,
    Which bears because of me the title of Famine,
    And in which others still must be locked up,

Had shown me through its opening many moons
    Already, when I dreamed the evil dream
    Which of the future rent for me the veil.

This one appeared to me as lord and master,
    Hunting the wolf and whelps upon the mountain
    For which the Pisans cannot Lucca see.

With sleuth-hounds gaunt, and eager, and well trained,
    Gualandi with Sismondi and Lanfianchi
    He had sent out before him to the front.

After brief course seemed unto me forespent
    The father and the sons, and with sharp tushes
    It seemed to me I saw their flanks ripped open.

When I before the morrow was awake,
    Moaning amid their sleep I heard my sons
    Who with me were, and asking after bread.

Cruel indeed art thou, if yet thou grieve not,
    Thinking of what my heart foreboded me,
    And weep’st thou not, what art thou wont to weep at?

They were awake now, and the hour drew nigh
    At which our food used to be brought to us,
    And through his dream was each one apprehensive;

And I heard locking up the under door
    Of the horrible tower; whereat without a word
    I gazed into the faces of my sons.

I wept not, I within so turned to stone;
    They wept; and darling little Anselm mine
    Said: ‘Thou dost gaze so, father, what doth ail thee?’

Still not a tear I shed, nor answer made
    All of that day, nor yet the night thereafter,
    Until another sun rose on the world.

As now a little glimmer made its way
    Into the dolorous prison, and I saw
    Upon four faces my own very aspect,

Both of my hands in agony I bit;
    And, thinking that I did it from desire
    Of eating, on a sudden they uprose,

And said they: ‘Father, much less pain ’twill give us
    If thou do eat of us; thyself didst clothe us
    With this poor flesh, and do thou strip it off.’

I calmed me then, not to make them more sad.
    That day we all were silent, and the next.
    Ah! obdurate earth, wherefore didst thou not open?

When we had come unto the fourth day, Gaddo
    Threw himself down outstretched before my feet,
    Saying, ‘My father, why dost thou not help me?’

And there he died; and, as thou seest me,
    I saw the three fall, one by one, between
    The fifth day and the sixth; whence I betook me,

Already blind, to groping over each,
    And three days called them after they were dead;
    Then hunger did what sorrow could not do.”

When he had said this, with his eyes distorted,
    The wretched skull resumed he with his teeth,
    Which, as a dog’s, upon the bone were strong.

Ah! Pisa, thou opprobrium of the people
    Of the fair land there where the ‘Si’ doth sound,
    Since slow to punish thee thy neighbours are,

Let the Capraia and Gorgona move,
    And make a hedge across the mouth of Arno
    That every person in thee it may drown!

For if Count Ugolino had the fame
    Of having in thy castles thee betrayed,
    Thou shouldst not on such cross have put his sons.

Guiltless of any crime, thou modern Thebes!
    Their youth made Uguccione and Brigata,
    And the other two my song doth name above!

We passed still farther onward, where the ice
    Another people ruggedly enswathes,
    Not downward turned, but all of them reversed.

Weeping itself there does not let them weep,
    And grief that finds a barrier in the eyes
    Turns itself inward to increase the anguish;

Because the earliest tears a cluster form,
    And, in the manner of a crystal visor,
    Fill all the cup beneath the eyebrow full.

And notwithstanding that, as in a callus,
    Because of cold all sensibility
    Its station had abandoned in my face,

Still it appeared to me I felt some wind;
    Whence I: “My Master, who sets this in motion?
    Is not below here every vapour quenched?”

Whence he to me: “Full soon shalt thou be where
    Thine eye shall answer make to thee of this,
    Seeing the cause which raineth down the blast.”

And one of the wretches of the frozen crust
    Cried out to us: “O souls so merciless
    That the last post is given unto you,

Lift from mine eyes the rigid veils, that I
    May vent the sorrow which impregns my heart
    A little, e’er the weeping recongeal.”

Whence I to him: “If thou wouldst have me help thee
    Say who thou wast; and if I free thee not,
    May I go to the bottom of the ice.”

Then he replied: “I am Friar Alberigo;
    He am I of the fruit of the bad garden,
    Who here a date am getting for my fig.”

“O,” said I to him, “now art thou, too, dead?”
    And he to me: “How may my body fare
    Up in the world, no knowledge I possess.

Such an advantage has this Ptolomaea,
    That oftentimes the soul descendeth here
    Sooner than Atropos in motion sets it.

And, that thou mayest more willingly remove
    From off my countenance these glassy tears,
    Know that as soon as any soul betrays

As I have done, his body by a demon
    Is taken from him, who thereafter rules it,
    Until his time has wholly been revolved.

Itself down rushes into such a cistern;
    And still perchance above appears the body
    Of yonder shade, that winters here behind me.

This thou shouldst know, if thou hast just come down;
    It is Ser Branca d’ Oria, and many years
    Have passed away since he was thus locked up.”

“I think,” said I to him, “thou dost deceive me;
    For Branca d’ Oria is not dead as yet,
    And eats, and drinks, and sleeps, and puts on clothes.”

“In moat above,” said he, “of Malebranche,
    There where is boiling the tenacious pitch,
    As yet had Michel Zanche not arrived,

When this one left a devil in his stead
    In his own body and one near of kin,
    Who made together with him the betrayal.

But hitherward stretch out thy hand forthwith,
    Open mine eyes;”—and open them I did not,
    And to be rude to him was courtesy.

Ah, Genoese! ye men at variance
    With every virtue, full of every vice
    Wherefore are ye not scattered from the world?

For with the vilest spirit of Romagna
    I found of you one such, who for his deeds
    In soul already in Cocytus bathes,

And still above in body seems alive!







“‘Vexilla Regis prodeunt Inferni’
    Towards us; therefore look in front of thee,”
    My Master said, “if thou discernest him.”

As, when there breathes a heavy fog, or when
    Our hemisphere is darkening into night,
    Appears far off a mill the wind is turning,

Methought that such a building then I saw;
    And, for the wind, I drew myself behind
    My Guide, because there was no other shelter.

Now was I, and with fear in verse I put it,
    There where the shades were wholly covered up,
    And glimmered through like unto straws in glass.

Some prone are lying, others stand erect,
    This with the head, and that one with the soles;
    Another, bow-like, face to feet inverts.

When in advance so far we had proceeded,
    That it my Master pleased to show to me
    The creature who once had the beauteous semblance,

He from before me moved and made me stop,
    Saying: “Behold Dis, and behold the place
    Where thou with fortitude must arm thyself.”

How frozen I became and powerless then,
    Ask it not, Reader, for I write it not,
    Because all language would be insufficient.

I did not die, and I alive remained not;
    Think for thyself now, hast thou aught of wit,
    What I became, being of both deprived.

The Emperor of the kingdom dolorous
    From his mid-breast forth issued from the ice;
    And better with a giant I compare

Than do the giants with those arms of his;
    Consider now how great must be that whole,
    Which unto such a part conforms itself.

Were he as fair once, as he now is foul,
    And lifted up his brow against his Maker,
    Well may proceed from him all tribulation.

O, what a marvel it appeared to me,
    When I beheld three faces on his head!
    The one in front, and that vermilion was;

Two were the others, that were joined with this
    Above the middle part of either shoulder,
    And they were joined together at the crest;

And the right-hand one seemed ’twixt white and yellow;
    The left was such to look upon as those
    Who come from where the Nile falls valley-ward.

Underneath each came forth two mighty wings,
    Such as befitting were so great a bird;
    Sails of the sea I never saw so large.

 No feathers had they, but as of a bat
    Their fashion was; and he was waving them,
    So that three winds proceeded forth therefrom.

Thereby Cocytus wholly was congealed.
    With six eyes did he weep, and down three chins
    Trickled the tear-drops and the bloody drivel.

At every mouth he with his teeth was crunching
    A sinner, in the manner of a brake,
    So that he three of them tormented thus.

To him in front the biting was as naught
    Unto the clawing, for sometimes the spine
    Utterly stripped of all the skin remained.

“That soul up there which has the greatest pain,”
    The Master said, “is Judas Iscariot;
    With head inside, he plies his legs without.

Of the two others, who head downward are,
    The one who hangs from the black jowl is Brutus;
    See how he writhes himself, and speaks no word.

And the other, who so stalwart seems, is Cassius.
    But night is reascending, and ’tis time
    That we depart, for we have seen the whole.”

As seemed him good, I clasped him round the neck,
    And he the vantage seized of time and place,
    And when the wings were opened wide apart,

He laid fast hold upon the shaggy sides;
    From fell to fell descended downward then
    Between the thick hair and the frozen crust.

When we were come to where the thigh revolves
    Exactly on the thickness of the haunch,
    The Guide, with labour and with hard-drawn breath,

Turned round his head where he had had his legs,
    And grappled to the hair, as one who mounts,
    So that to Hell I thought we were returning.

“Keep fast thy hold, for by such stairs as these,”
    The Master said, panting as one fatigued,
    “Must we perforce depart from so much evil.”

Then through the opening of a rock he issued,
    And down upon the margin seated me;
    Then tow’rds me he outstretched his wary step.

I lifted up mine eyes and thought to see
    Lucifer in the same way I had left him;
    And I beheld him upward hold his legs.

And if I then became disquieted,
    Let stolid people think who do not see
    What the point is beyond which I had passed.

“Rise up,” the Master said, “upon thy feet;
    The way is long, and difficult the road,
    And now the sun to middle-tierce returns.”

It was not any palace corridor
    There where we were, but dungeon natural,
    With floor uneven and unease of light.

“Ere from the abyss I tear myself away,
    My Master,” said I when I had arisen,
    “To draw me from an error speak a little;

Where is the ice? and how is this one fixed
    Thus upside down? and how in such short time
    From eve to morn has the sun made his transit?”

And he to me: “Thou still imaginest
    Thou art beyond the centre, where I grasped
    The hair of the fell worm, who mines the world.

That side thou wast, so long as I descended;
    When round I turned me, thou didst pass the point
    To which things heavy draw from every side,

And now beneath the hemisphere art come
    Opposite that which overhangs the vast
    Dry-land, and ’neath whose cope was put to death

The Man who without sin was born and lived.
    Thou hast thy feet upon the little sphere
    Which makes the other face of the Judecca.

Here it is morn when it is evening there;
    And he who with his hair a stairway made us
    Still fixed remaineth as he was before.

Upon this side he fell down out of heaven;
    And all the land, that whilom here emerged,
    For fear of him made of the sea a veil,

And came to our hemisphere; and peradventure
    To flee from him, what on this side appears
    Left the place vacant here, and back recoiled.”

A place there is below, from Beelzebub
    As far receding as the tomb extends,
    Which not by sight is known, but by the sound

Of a small rivulet, that there descendeth
    Through chasm within the stone, which it has gnawed
    With course that winds about and slightly falls.

The Guide and I into that hidden road
    Now entered, to return to the bright world;
    And without care of having any rest

We mounted up, he first and I the second,
    Till I beheld through a round aperture
    Some of the beauteous things that Heaven doth bear;

Thence we came forth to rebehold the stars.






To run o’er better waters hoists its sail
    The little vessel of my genius now,
    That leaves behind itself a sea so cruel;

And of that second kingdom will I sing
    Wherein the human spirit doth purge itself,
    And to ascend to heaven becometh worthy.

But let dead Poesy here rise again,
    O holy Muses, since that I am yours,
    And here Calliope somewhat ascend,

My song accompanying with that sound,
    Of which the miserable magpies felt
    The blow so great, that they despaired of pardon.

Sweet colour of the oriental sapphire,
    That was upgathered in the cloudless aspect
    Of the pure air, as far as the first circle,

Unto mine eyes did recommence delight
    Soon as I issued forth from the dead air,
    Which had with sadness filled mine eyes and breast.

The beauteous planet, that to love incites,
    Was making all the orient to laugh,
    Veiling the Fishes that were in her escort.

To the right hand I turned, and fixed my mind
    Upon the other pole, and saw four stars
    Ne’er seen before save by the primal people.

Rejoicing in their flamelets seemed the heaven.
    O thou septentrional and widowed site,
    Because thou art deprived of seeing these!

When from regarding them I had withdrawn,
    Turning a little to the other pole,
    There where the Wain had disappeared already,

I saw beside me an old man alone,
    Worthy of so much reverence in his look,
    That more owes not to father any son.

A long beard and with white hair intermingled
    He wore, in semblance like unto the tresses,
    Of which a double list fell on his breast.

The rays of the four consecrated stars
    Did so adorn his countenance with light,
    That him I saw as were the sun before him.

“Who are you? ye who, counter the blind river,
    Have fled away from the eternal prison?”
    Moving those venerable plumes, he said:

“Who guided you? or who has been your lamp
    In issuing forth out of the night profound,
    That ever black makes the infernal valley?

The laws of the abyss, are they thus broken?
    Or is there changed in heaven some council new,
    That being damned ye come unto my crags?”

Then did my Leader lay his grasp upon me,
    And with his words, and with his hands and signs,
    Reverent he made in me my knees and brow;

Then answered him: “I came not of myself;
    A Lady from Heaven descended, at whose prayers
    I aided this one with my company.

But since it is thy will more be unfolded
    Of our condition, how it truly is,
    Mine cannot be that this should be denied thee.

This one has never his last evening seen,
    But by his folly was so near to it
    That very little time was there to turn.

As I have said, I unto him was sent
    To rescue him, and other way was none
    Than this to which I have myself betaken.

I’ve shown him all the people of perdition,
    And now those spirits I intend to show
    Who purge themselves beneath thy guardianship.

How I have brought him would be long to tell thee.
    Virtue descendeth from on high that aids me
    To lead him to behold thee and to hear thee.

Now may it please thee to vouchsafe his coming;
    He seeketh Liberty, which is so dear,
    As knoweth he who life for her refuses.

Thou know’st it; since, for her, to thee not bitter
    Was death in Utica, where thou didst leave
    The vesture, that will shine so, the great day.

By us the eternal edicts are not broken;
    Since this one lives, and Minos binds not me;
    But of that circle I, where are the chaste

Eyes of thy Marcia, who in looks still prays thee,
    O holy breast, to hold her as thine own;
    For her love, then, incline thyself to us.

Permit us through thy sevenfold realm to go;
    I will take back this grace from thee to her,
    If to be mentioned there below thou deignest.”

“Marcia so pleasing was unto mine eyes
    While I was on the other side,” then said he,
    “That every grace she wished of me I granted;

Now that she dwells beyond the evil river,
    She can no longer move me, by that law
    Which, when I issued forth from there, was made.

But if a Lady of Heaven do move and rule thee,
    As thou dost say, no flattery is needful;
    Let it suffice thee that for her thou ask me.

Go, then, and see thou gird this one about
    With a smooth rush, and that thou wash his face,
    So that thou cleanse away all stain therefrom,

For ’twere not fitting that the eye o’ercast
    By any mist should go before the first
    Angel, who is of those of Paradise.

This little island round about its base
    Below there, yonder, where the billow beats it,
    Doth rushes bear upon its washy ooze;

No other plant that putteth forth the leaf,
    Or that doth indurate, can there have life,
    Because it yieldeth not unto the shocks.

Thereafter be not this way your return;
    The sun, which now is rising, will direct you
    To take the mount by easier ascent.”

With this he vanished; and I raised me up
    Without a word, and wholly drew myself
    Unto my Guide, and turned mine eyes to him.

And he began: “Son, follow thou my steps;
    Let us turn back, for on this side declines
    The plain unto its lower boundaries.”

The dawn was vanquishing the matin hour
    Which fled before it, so that from afar
    I recognised the trembling of the sea.

Along the solitary plain we went
    As one who unto the lost road returns,
    And till he finds it seems to go in vain.

As soon as we were come to where the dew
    Fights with the sun, and, being in a part
    Where shadow falls, little evaporates,

Both of his hands upon the grass outspread
    In gentle manner did my Master place;
    Whence I, who of his action was aware,

Extended unto him my tearful cheeks;
    There did he make in me uncovered wholly
    That hue which Hell had covered up in me.

Then came we down upon the desert shore
    Which never yet saw navigate its waters
    Any that afterward had known return.

There he begirt me as the other pleased;
    O marvellous! for even as he culled
    The humble plant, such it sprang up again

Suddenly there where he uprooted it.







Already had the sun the horizon reached
    Whose circle of meridian covers o’er
    Jerusalem with its most lofty point,

And night that opposite to him revolves
    Was issuing forth from Ganges with the Scales
    That fall from out her hand when she exceedeth;

So that the white and the vermilion cheeks
    Of beautiful Aurora, where I was,
    By too great age were changing into orange.

We still were on the border of the sea,
    Like people who are thinking of their road,
    Who go in heart and with the body stay;

And lo! as when, upon the approach of morning,
    Through the gross vapours Mars grows fiery red
    Down in the West upon the ocean floor,

Appeared to me—may I again behold it!—
    A light along the sea so swiftly coming,
    Its motion by no flight of wing is equalled;

From which when I a little had withdrawn
    Mine eyes, that I might question my Conductor,
    Again I saw it brighter grown and larger.

Then on each side of it appeared to me
    I knew not what of white, and underneath it
    Little by little there came forth another.

My Master yet had uttered not a word
    While the first whiteness into wings unfolded;
    But when he clearly recognised the pilot,

He cried: “Make haste, make haste to bow the knee!
    Behold the Angel of God! fold thou thy hands!
    Henceforward shalt thou see such officers!

See how he scorneth human arguments,
    So that nor oar he wants, nor other sail
    Than his own wings, between so distant shores.

See how he holds them pointed up to heaven,
    Fanning the air with the eternal pinions,
    That do not moult themselves like mortal hair!”

Then as still nearer and more near us came
    The Bird Divine, more radiant he appeared,
    So that near by the eye could not endure him,

But down I cast it; and he came to shore
    With a small vessel, very swift and light,
    So that the water swallowed naught thereof.

Upon the stern stood the Celestial Pilot;
    Beatitude seemed written in his face,
    And more than a hundred spirits sat within.

“In exitu Israel de Aegypto!”
    They chanted all together in one voice,
    With whatso in that psalm is after written.

Then made he sign of holy rood upon them,
    Whereat all cast themselves upon the shore,
    And he departed swiftly as he came.

The throng which still remained there unfamiliar
    Seemed with the place, all round about them gazing,
    As one who in new matters makes essay.

On every side was darting forth the day.
    The sun, who had with his resplendent shafts
    From the mid-heaven chased forth the Capricorn,

When the new people lifted up their faces
    Towards us, saying to us: “If ye know,
    Show us the way to go unto the mountain.”

And answer made Virgilius: “Ye believe
    Perchance that we have knowledge of this place,
    But we are strangers even as yourselves.

Just now we came, a little while before you,
    Another way, which was so rough and steep,
    That mounting will henceforth seem sport to us.”

The souls who had, from seeing me draw breath,
    Become aware that I was still alive,
    Pallid in their astonishment became;

And as to messenger who bears the olive
    The people throng to listen to the news,
    And no one shows himself afraid of crowding,

So at the sight of me stood motionless
    Those fortunate spirits, all of them, as if
    Oblivious to go and make them fair.

One from among them saw I coming forward,
    As to embrace me, with such great affection,
    That it incited me to do the like.

O empty shadows, save in aspect only!
    Three times behind it did I clasp my hands,
    As oft returned with them to my own breast!

I think with wonder I depicted me;
    Whereat the shadow smiled and backward drew;
    And I, pursuing it, pressed farther forward.

Gently it said that I should stay my steps;
    Then knew I who it was, and I entreated
    That it would stop awhile to speak with me.

It made reply to me: “Even as I loved thee
    In mortal body, so I love thee free;
    Therefore I stop; but wherefore goest thou?”

“My own Casella! to return once more
    There where I am, I make this journey,” said I;
    “But how from thee has so much time be taken?”

And he to me: “No outrage has been done me,
    If he who takes both when and whom he pleases
    Has many times denied to me this passage,

For of a righteous will his own is made.
    He, sooth to say, for three months past has taken
    Whoever wished to enter with all peace;

Whence I, who now had turned unto that shore
    Where salt the waters of the Tiber grow,
    Benignantly by him have been received.

Unto that outlet now his wing is pointed,
    Because for evermore assemble there
    Those who tow’rds Acheron do not descend.”

And I: “If some new law take not from thee
    Memory or practice of the song of love,
    Which used to quiet in me all my longings,

Thee may it please to comfort therewithal
    Somewhat this soul of mine, that with its body
    Hitherward coming is so much distressed.”

“Love, that within my mind discourses with me,”
    Forthwith began he so melodiously,
    The melody within me still is sounding.

My Master, and myself, and all that people
    Which with him were, appeared as satisfied
    As if naught else might touch the mind of any.

We all of us were moveless and attentive
    Unto his notes; and lo! the grave old man,
    Exclaiming: “What is this, ye laggard spirits?

What negligence, what standing still is this?
    Run to the mountain to strip off the slough,
    That lets not God be manifest to you.”

Even as when, collecting grain or tares,
    The doves, together at their pasture met,
    Quiet, nor showing their accustomed pride,

If aught appear of which they are afraid,
    Upon a sudden leave their food alone,
    Because they are assailed by greater care;

So that fresh company did I behold
    The song relinquish, and go tow’rds the hill,
    As one who goes, and knows not whitherward;

Nor was our own departure less in haste.







Inasmuch as the instantaneous flight
    Had scattered them asunder o’er the plain,
    Turned to the mountain whither reason spurs us,

I pressed me close unto my faithful comrade,
    And how without him had I kept my course?
    Who would have led me up along the mountain?

He seemed to me within himself remorseful;
    O noble conscience, and without a stain,
    How sharp a sting is trivial fault to thee!

After his feet had laid aside the haste
    Which mars the dignity of every act,
    My mind, that hitherto had been restrained,

Let loose its faculties as if delighted,
    And I my sight directed to the hill
    That highest tow’rds the heaven uplifts itself.

The sun, that in our rear was flaming red,
    Was broken in front of me into the figure
    Which had in me the stoppage of its rays;

Unto one side I turned me, with the fear
    Of being left alone, when I beheld
    Only in front of me the ground obscured.

“Why dost thou still mistrust?” my Comforter
    Began to say to me turned wholly round;
    “Dost thou not think me with thee, and that I guide thee?

’Tis evening there already where is buried
    The body within which I cast a shadow;
    ’Tis from Brundusium ta’en, and Naples has it.

Now if in front of me no shadow fall,
    Marvel not at it more than at the heavens,
    Because one ray impedeth not another

To suffer torments, both of cold and heat,
    Bodies like this that Power provides, which wills
    That how it works be not unveiled to us.

Insane is he who hopeth that our reason
    Can traverse the illimitable way,
    Which the one Substance in three Persons follows!

Mortals, remain contented at the ‘Quia;’
    For if ye had been able to see all,
    No need there were for Mary to give birth;

And ye have seen desiring without fruit,
    Those whose desire would have been quieted,
    Which evermore is given them for a grief.

I speak of Aristotle and of Plato,
    And many others;”—and here bowed his head,
    And more he said not, and remained disturbed.

We came meanwhile unto the mountain’s foot;
    There so precipitate we found the rock,
    That nimble legs would there have been in vain.

’Twixt Lerici and Turbia, the most desert,
    The most secluded pathway is a stair
    Easy and open, if compared with that.

“Who knoweth now upon which hand the hill
    Slopes down,” my Master said, his footsteps staying,
    “So that who goeth without wings may mount?”

And while he held his eyes upon the ground
    Examining the nature of the path,
    And I was looking up around the rock,

On the left hand appeared to me a throng
    Of souls, that moved their feet in our direction,
    And did not seem to move, they came so slowly.

“Lift up thine eyes,” I to the Master said;
    “Behold, on this side, who will give us counsel,
    If thou of thine own self can have it not.”

Then he looked at me, and with frank expression
    Replied: “Let us go there, for they come slowly,
    And thou be steadfast in thy hope, sweet son.”

Still was that people as far off from us,
    After a thousand steps of ours I say,
    As a good thrower with his hand would reach,

When they all crowded unto the hard masses
    Of the high bank, and motionless stood and close,
    As he stands still to look who goes in doubt.

“O happy dead!  O spirits elect already!”
    Virgilius made beginning, “by that peace
    Which I believe is waiting for you all,

Tell us upon what side the mountain slopes,
    So that the going up be possible,
    For to lose time irks him most who most knows.”

As sheep come issuing forth from out the fold
    By ones and twos and threes, and the others stand
    Timidly, holding down their eyes and nostrils,

And what the foremost does the others do,
    Huddling themselves against her, if she stop,
    Simple and quiet and the wherefore know not;

So moving to approach us thereupon
    I saw the leader of that fortunate flock,
    Modest in face and dignified in gait.

As soon as those in the advance saw broken
    The light upon the ground at my right side,
    So that from me the shadow reached the rock,

They stopped, and backward drew themselves somewhat;
    And all the others, who came after them,
    Not knowing why nor wherefore, did the same.

“Without your asking, I confess to you
    This is a human body which you see,
    Whereby the sunshine on the ground is cleft.

Marvel ye not thereat, but be persuaded
    That not without a power which comes from Heaven
    Doth he endeavour to surmount this wall.”

The Master thus; and said those worthy people:
    “Return ye then, and enter in before us,”
    Making a signal with the back o’ the hand

And one of them began: “Whoe’er thou art,
    Thus going turn thine eyes, consider well
    If e’er thou saw me in the other world.”

I turned me tow’rds him, and looked at him closely;
    Blond was he, beautiful, and of noble aspect,
    But one of his eyebrows had a blow divided.

When with humility I had disclaimed
    E’er having seen him, “Now behold!” he said,
    And showed me high upon his breast a wound.

Then said he with a smile: “I am Manfredi,
    The grandson of the Empress Costanza;
    Therefore, when thou returnest, I beseech thee

Go to my daughter beautiful, the mother
    Of Sicily’s honour and of Aragon’s,
    And the truth tell her, if aught else be told.

After I had my body lacerated
    By these two mortal stabs, I gave myself
    Weeping to Him, who willingly doth pardon.

Horrible my iniquities had been;
    But Infinite Goodness hath such ample arms,
    That it receives whatever turns to it.

Had but Cosenza’s pastor, who in chase
    Of me was sent by Clement at that time,
    In God read understandingly this page,

The bones of my dead body still would be
    At the bridge-head, near unto Benevento,
    Under the safeguard of the heavy cairn.

Now the rain bathes and moveth them the wind,
    Beyond the realm, almost beside the Verde,
    Where he transported them with tapers quenched.

By malison of theirs is not so lost
    Eternal Love, that it cannot return,
    So long as hope has anything of green.

True is it, who in contumacy dies
    Of Holy Church, though penitent at last,
    Must wait upon the outside this bank

Thirty times told the time that he has been
    In his presumption, unless such decree
    Shorter by means of righteous prayers become.

See now if thou hast power to make me happy,
    By making known unto my good Costanza
    How thou hast seen me, and this ban beside,

For those on earth can much advance us here.”







Whenever by delight or else by pain,
    That seizes any faculty of ours,
    Wholly to that the soul collects itself,

It seemeth that no other power it heeds;
    And this against that error is which thinks
    One soul above another kindles in us.

And hence, whenever aught is heard or seen
    Which keeps the soul intently bent upon it,
    Time passes on, and we perceive it not,

Because one faculty is that which listens,
    And other that which the soul keeps entire;
    This is as if in bonds, and that is free.

Of this I had experience positive
    In hearing and in gazing at that spirit;
    For fifty full degrees uprisen was

The sun, and I had not perceived it, when
    We came to where those souls with one accord
    Cried out unto us: “Here is what you ask.”

A greater opening ofttimes hedges up
    With but a little forkful of his thorns
    The villager, what time the grape imbrowns,

Than was the passage-way through which ascended
    Only my Leader and myself behind him,
    After that company departed from us.

One climbs Sanleo and descends in Noli,
    And mounts the summit of Bismantova,
    With feet alone; but here one needs must fly;

With the swift pinions and the plumes I say
    Of great desire, conducted after him
    Who gave me hope, and made a light for me.

We mounted upward through the rifted rock,
    And on each side the border pressed upon us,
    And feet and hands the ground beneath required.

When we were come upon the upper rim
    Of the high bank, out on the open slope,
    “My Master,” said I, “what way shall we take?”

And he to me: “No step of thine descend;
    Still up the mount behind me win thy way,
    Till some sage escort shall appear to us.”

The summit was so high it vanquished sight,
    And the hillside precipitous far more
    Than line from middle quadrant to the centre.

Spent with fatigue was I, when I began:
    “O my sweet Father! turn thee and behold
    How I remain alone, unless thou stay!”

“O son,” he said, “up yonder drag thyself,”
    Pointing me to a terrace somewhat higher,
    Which on that side encircles all the hill.

These words of his so spurred me on, that I
    Strained every nerve, behind him scrambling up,
    Until the circle was beneath my feet.

Thereon ourselves we seated both of us
    Turned to the East, from which we had ascended,
    For all men are delighted to look back.

To the low shores mine eyes I first directed,
    Then to the sun uplifted them, and wondered
    That on the left hand we were smitten by it.

The Poet well perceived that I was wholly
    Bewildered at the chariot of the light,
    Where ’twixt us and the Aquilon it entered.

Whereon he said to me: “If Castor and Pollux
    Were in the company of yonder mirror,
    That up and down conducteth with its light,

Thou wouldst behold the zodiac’s jagged wheel
    Revolving still more near unto the Bears,
    Unless it swerved aside from its old track.

How that may be wouldst thou have power to think,
    Collected in thyself, imagine Zion
    Together with this mount on earth to stand,

So that they both one sole horizon have,
    And hemispheres diverse; whereby the road
    Which Phaeton, alas! knew not to drive,

Thou’lt see how of necessity must pass
    This on one side, when that upon the other,
    If thine intelligence right clearly heed.”

“Truly, my Master,” said I, “never yet
    Saw I so clearly as I now discern,
    There where my wit appeared incompetent,

That the mid-circle of supernal motion,
    Which in some art is the Equator called,
    And aye remains between the Sun and Winter,

For reason which thou sayest, departeth hence
    Tow’rds the Septentrion, what time the Hebrews
    Beheld it tow’rds the region of the heat.

But, if it pleaseth thee, I fain would learn
    How far we have to go; for the hill rises
    Higher than eyes of mine have power to rise.”

And he to me: “This mount is such, that ever
    At the beginning down below ’tis tiresome,
    And aye the more one climbs, the less it hurts.

Therefore, when it shall seem so pleasant to thee,
    That going up shall be to thee as easy
    As going down the current in a boat,

Then at this pathway’s ending thou wilt be;
    There to repose thy panting breath expect;
    No more I answer; and this I know for true.”

And as he finished uttering these words,
    A voice close by us sounded: “Peradventure
    Thou wilt have need of sitting down ere that.”

At sound thereof each one of us turned round,
    And saw upon the left hand a great rock,
    Which neither I nor he before had noticed.

Thither we drew; and there were persons there
    Who in the shadow stood behind the rock,
    As one through indolence is wont to stand.

And one of them, who seemed to me fatigued,
    Was sitting down, and both his knees embraced,
    Holding his face low down between them bowed.

“O my sweet Lord,” I said, “do turn thine eye
    On him who shows himself more negligent
    Then even Sloth herself his sister were.”

Then he turned round to us, and he gave heed,
    Just lifting up his eyes above his thigh,
    And said: “Now go thou up, for thou art valiant.”

Then knew I who he was; and the distress,
    That still a little did my breathing quicken,
    My going to him hindered not; and after

I came to him he hardly raised his head,
    Saying: “Hast thou seen clearly how the sun
    O’er thy left shoulder drives his chariot?”

His sluggish attitude and his curt words
    A little unto laughter moved my lips;
    Then I began: “Belacqua, I grieve not

For thee henceforth; but tell me, wherefore seated
    In this place art thou?  Waitest thou an escort?
    Or has thy usual habit seized upon thee?”

And he: “O brother, what’s the use of climbing?
    Since to my torment would not let me go
    The Angel of God, who sitteth at the gate.

First heaven must needs so long revolve me round
    Outside thereof, as in my life it did,
    Since the good sighs I to the end postponed,

Unless, e’er that, some prayer may bring me aid
    Which rises from a heart that lives in grace;
    What profit others that in heaven are heard not?”

Meanwhile the Poet was before me mounting,
    And saying: “Come now; see the sun has touched
    Meridian, and from the shore the night

Covers already with her foot Morocco.”







I had already from those shades departed,
    And followed in the footsteps of my Guide,
    When from behind, pointing his finger at me,

One shouted: “See, it seems as if shone not
    The sunshine on the left of him below,
    And like one living seems he to conduct him.”

Mine eyes I turned at utterance of these words,
    And saw them watching with astonishment
    But me, but me, and the light which was broken!

“Why doth thy mind so occupy itself,”
    The Master said, “that thou thy pace dost slacken?
    What matters it to thee what here is whispered?

Come after me, and let the people talk;
    Stand like a steadfast tower, that never wags
    Its top for all the blowing of the winds;

For evermore the man in whom is springing
    Thought upon thought, removes from him the mark,
    Because the force of one the other weakens.”

What could I say in answer but “I come”?
    I said it somewhat with that colour tinged
    Which makes a man of pardon sometimes worthy.

Meanwhile along the mountain-side across
    Came people in advance of us a little,
    Singing the Miserere verse by verse.

When they became aware I gave no place
    For passage of the sunshine through my body,
    They changed their song into a long, hoarse “Oh!”

And two of them, in form of messengers,
    Ran forth to meet us, and demanded of us,
    “Of your condition make us cognisant.”

And said my Master: “Ye can go your way
    And carry back again to those who sent you,
    That this one’s body is of very flesh.

If they stood still because they saw his shadow,
    As I suppose, enough is answered them;
    Him let them honour, it may profit them.”

Vapours enkindled saw I ne’er so swiftly
    At early nightfall cleave the air serene,
    Nor, at the set of sun, the clouds of August,

But upward they returned in briefer time,
    And, on arriving, with the others wheeled
    Tow’rds us, like troops that run without a rein.

“This folk that presses unto us is great,
    And cometh to implore thee,” said the Poet;
    “So still go onward, and in going listen.”

“O soul that goest to beatitude
    With the same members wherewith thou wast born,”
    Shouting they came, “a little stay thy steps,

Look, if thou e’er hast any of us seen,
    So that o’er yonder thou bear news of him;
    Ah, why dost thou go on?  Ah, why not stay?

Long since we all were slain by violence,
    And sinners even to the latest hour;
    Then did a light from heaven admonish us,

So that, both penitent and pardoning, forth
    From life we issued reconciled to God,
    Who with desire to see Him stirs our hearts.”

And I: “Although I gaze into your faces,
    No one I recognize; but if may please you
    Aught I have power to do, ye well-born spirits,

Speak ye, and I will do it, by that peace
    Which, following the feet of such a Guide,
    From world to world makes itself sought by me.”

And one began: “Each one has confidence
    In thy good offices without an oath,
    Unless the I cannot cut off the I will;

Whence I, who speak alone before the others,
    Pray thee, if ever thou dost see the land
    That ’twixt Romagna lies and that of Charles,

Thou be so courteous to me of thy prayers
    In Fano, that they pray for me devoutly,
    That I may purge away my grave offences.

From thence was I; but the deep wounds, through which
    Issued the blood wherein I had my seat,
    Were dealt me in bosom of the Antenori,

There where I thought to be the most secure;
    ’Twas he of Este had it done, who held me
    In hatred far beyond what justice willed.

But if towards the Mira I had fled,
    When I was overtaken at Oriaco,
    I still should be o’er yonder where men breathe.

I ran to the lagoon, and reeds and mire
    Did so entangle me I fell, and saw there
    A lake made from my veins upon the ground.”

Then said another: “Ah, be that desire
    Fulfilled that draws thee to the lofty mountain,
    As thou with pious pity aidest mine.

I was of Montefeltro, and am Buonconte;
    Giovanna, nor none other cares for me;
    Hence among these I go with downcast front.”

And I to him: “What violence or what chance
    Led thee astray so far from Campaldino,
    That never has thy sepulture been known?”

“Oh,” he replied, “at Casentino’s foot
    A river crosses named Archiano, born
    Above the Hermitage in Apennine.

There where the name thereof becometh void
    Did I arrive, pierced through and through the throat,
    Fleeing on foot, and bloodying the plain;

There my sight lost I, and my utterance
    Ceased in the name of Mary, and thereat
    I fell, and tenantless my flesh remained.

Truth will I speak, repeat it to the living;
    God’s Angel took me up, and he of hell
    Shouted: ‘O thou from heaven, why dost thou rob me?

Thou bearest away the eternal part of him,
    For one poor little tear, that takes him from me;
    But with the rest I’ll deal in other fashion!’

Well knowest thou how in the air is gathered
    That humid vapour which to water turns,
    Soon as it rises where the cold doth grasp it.

He joined that evil will, which aye seeks evil,
    To intellect, and moved the mist and wind
    By means of power, which his own nature gave;

Thereafter, when the day was spent, the valley
    From Pratomagno to the great yoke covered
    With fog, and made the heaven above intent,

So that the pregnant air to water changed;
    Down fell the rain, and to the gullies came
    Whate’er of it earth tolerated not;

And as it mingled with the mighty torrents,
    Towards the royal river with such speed
    It headlong rushed, that nothing held it back.

My frozen body near unto its outlet
    The robust Archian found, and into Arno
    Thrust it, and loosened from my breast the cross

I made of me, when agony o’ercame me;
    It rolled me on the banks and on the bottom,
    Then with its booty covered and begirt me.”

“Ah, when thou hast returned unto the world,
    And rested thee from thy long journeying,”
    After the second followed the third spirit,

“Do thou remember me who am the Pia;
    Siena made me, unmade me Maremma;
    He knoweth it, who had encircled first,

Espousing me, my finger with his gem.”







Whene’er is broken up the game of Zara,
    He who has lost remains behind despondent,
    The throws repeating, and in sadness learns;

The people with the other all depart;
    One goes in front, and one behind doth pluck him,
    And at his side one brings himself to mind;

He pauses not, and this and that one hears;
    They crowd no more to whom his hand he stretches,
    And from the throng he thus defends himself.

Even such was I in that dense multitude,
    Turning to them this way and that my face,
    And, promising, I freed myself therefrom.

There was the Aretine, who from the arms
    Untamed of Ghin di Tacco had his death,
    And he who fleeing from pursuit was drowned.

There was imploring with his hands outstretched
    Frederick Novello, and that one of Pisa
    Who made the good Marzucco seem so strong.

I saw Count Orso; and the soul divided
    By hatred and by envy from its body,
    As it declared, and not for crime committed,

Pierre de la Brosse I say; and here provide
    While still on earth the Lady of Brabant,
    So that for this she be of no worse flock!

As soon as I was free from all those shades
    Who only prayed that some one else may pray,
    So as to hasten their becoming holy,

Began I: “It appears that thou deniest,
    O light of mine, expressly in some text,
    That orison can bend decree of Heaven;

And ne’ertheless these people pray for this.
    Might then their expectation bootless be?
    Or is to me thy saying not quite clear?”

And he to me: “My writing is explicit,
    And not fallacious is the hope of these,
    If with sane intellect ’tis well regarded;

For top of judgment doth not vail itself,
    Because the fire of love fulfils at once
    What he must satisfy who here installs him.

And there, where I affirmed that proposition,
    Defect was not amended by a prayer,
    Because the prayer from God was separate.

Verily, in so deep a questioning
    Do not decide, unless she tell it thee,
    Who light ’twixt truth and intellect shall be.

I know not if thou understand; I speak
    Of Beatrice; her shalt thou see above,
    Smiling and happy, on this mountain’s top.”

And I: “Good Leader, let us make more haste,
    For I no longer tire me as before;
    And see, e’en now the hill a shadow casts.”

“We will go forward with this day” he answered,
    “As far as now is possible for us;
    But otherwise the fact is than thou thinkest.

Ere thou art up there, thou shalt see return
    Him, who now hides himself behind the hill,
    So that thou dost not interrupt his rays.

But yonder there behold! a soul that stationed
    All, all alone is looking hitherward;
    It will point out to us the quickest way.”

We came up unto it; O Lombard soul,
    How lofty and disdainful thou didst bear thee,
    And grand and slow in moving of thine eyes!

Nothing whatever did it say to us,
    But let us go our way, eying us only
    After the manner of a couchant lion;

Still near to it Virgilius drew, entreating
    That it would point us out the best ascent;
    And it replied not unto his demand,

But of our native land and of our life
    It questioned us; and the sweet Guide began:
    “Mantua,”—and the shade, all in itself recluse,

Rose tow’rds him from the place where first it was,
    Saying: “O Mantuan, I am Sordello
    Of thine own land!” and one embraced the other.

Ah! servile Italy, grief’s hostelry!
    A ship without a pilot in great tempest!
    No Lady thou of Provinces, but brothel!

That noble soul was so impatient, only
    At the sweet sound of his own native land,
    To make its citizen glad welcome there;

And now within thee are not without war
    Thy living ones, and one doth gnaw the other
    Of those whom one wall and one fosse shut in!

Search, wretched one, all round about the shores
    Thy seaboard, and then look within thy bosom,
    If any part of thee enjoyeth peace!

What boots it, that for thee Justinian
    The bridle mend, if empty be the saddle?
    Withouten this the shame would be the less.

Ah! people, thou that oughtest to be devout,
    And to let Caesar sit upon the saddle,
    If well thou hearest what God teacheth thee,

Behold how fell this wild beast has become,
    Being no longer by the spur corrected,
    Since thou hast laid thy hand upon the bridle.

O German Albert! who abandonest
    Her that has grown recalcitrant and savage,
    And oughtest to bestride her saddle-bow,

May a just judgment from the stars down fall
    Upon thy blood, and be it new and open,
    That thy successor may have fear thereof;

Because thy father and thyself have suffered,
    By greed of those transalpine lands distrained,
    The garden of the empire to be waste.

Come and behold Montecchi and Cappelletti,
    Monaldi and Fillippeschi, careless man!
    Those sad already, and these doubt-depressed!

Come, cruel one! come and behold the oppression
    Of thy nobility, and cure their wounds,
    And thou shalt see how safe is Santafiore!

Come and behold thy Rome, that is lamenting,
    Widowed, alone, and day and night exclaims,
    “My Caesar, why hast thou forsaken me?”

Come and behold how loving are the people;
    And if for us no pity moveth thee,
    Come and be made ashamed of thy renown!

And if it lawful be, O Jove Supreme!
    Who upon earth for us wast crucified,
    Are thy just eyes averted otherwhere?

Or preparation is ’t, that, in the abyss
    Of thine own counsel, for some good thou makest
    From our perception utterly cut off?

For all the towns of Italy are full
    Of tyrants, and becometh a Marcellus
    Each peasant churl who plays the partisan!

My Florence! well mayst thou contented be
    With this digression, which concerns thee not,
    Thanks to thy people who such forethought take!

Many at heart have justice, but shoot slowly,
    That unadvised they come not to the bow,
    But on their very lips thy people have it!

Many refuse to bear the common burden;
    But thy solicitous people answereth
    Without being asked, and crieth: “I submit.”

Now be thou joyful, for thou hast good reason;
    Thou affluent, thou in peace, thou full of wisdom!
    If I speak true, the event conceals it not.

Athens and Lacedaemon, they who made
    The ancient laws, and were so civilized,
    Made towards living well a little sign

Compared with thee, who makest such fine-spun
    Provisions, that to middle of November
    Reaches not what thou in October spinnest.

How oft, within the time of thy remembrance,
    Laws, money, offices, and usages
    Hast thou remodelled, and renewed thy members?

And if thou mind thee well, and see the light,
    Thou shalt behold thyself like a sick woman,
    Who cannot find repose upon her down,

But by her tossing wardeth off her pain.






After the gracious and glad salutations
    Had three and four times been reiterated,
    Sordello backward drew and said, “Who are you?”

“Or ever to this mountain were directed
    The souls deserving to ascend to God,
    My bones were buried by Octavian.

I am Virgilius; and for no crime else
    Did I lose heaven, than for not having faith;”
    In this wise then my Leader made reply.

As one who suddenly before him sees
    Something whereat he marvels, who believes
    And yet does not, saying, “It is! it is not!”

So he appeared; and then bowed down his brow,
    And with humility returned towards him,
    And, where inferiors embrace, embraced him.

“O glory of the Latians, thou,” he said,
    “Through whom our language showed what it could do
    O pride eternal of the place I came from,

What merit or what grace to me reveals thee?
    If I to hear thy words be worthy, tell me
    If thou dost come from Hell, and from what cloister.”

“Through all the circles of the doleful realm,”
    Responded he, “have I come hitherward;
    Heaven’s power impelled me, and with that I come.

I by not doing, not by doing, lost
    The sight of that high sun which thou desirest,
    And which too late by me was recognized.

A place there is below not sad with torments,
    But darkness only, where the lamentations
    Have not the sound of wailing, but are sighs.

There dwell I with the little innocents
    Snatched by the teeth of Death, or ever they
    Were from our human sinfulness exempt.

There dwell I among those who the three saintly
    Virtues did not put on, and without vice
    The others knew and followed all of them.

But if thou know and can, some indication
    Give us by which we may the sooner come
    Where Purgatory has its right beginning.”

He answered: “No fixed place has been assigned us;
    ’Tis lawful for me to go up and round;
    So far as I can go, as guide I join thee.

But see already how the day declines,
    And to go up by night we are not able;
    Therefore ’tis well to think of some fair sojourn.

Souls are there on the right hand here withdrawn;
    If thou permit me I will lead thee to them,
    And thou shalt know them not without delight.”

“How is this?” was the answer; “should one wish
    To mount by night would he prevented be
    By others? or mayhap would not have power?”

And on the ground the good Sordello drew
    His finger, saying, “See, this line alone
    Thou couldst not pass after the sun is gone;

Not that aught else would hindrance give, however,
    To going up, save the nocturnal darkness;
    This with the want of power the will perplexes.

We might indeed therewith return below,
    And, wandering, walk the hill-side round about,
    While the horizon holds the day imprisoned.”

Thereon my Lord, as if in wonder, said:
    “Do thou conduct us thither, where thou sayest
    That we can take delight in tarrying.”

Little had we withdrawn us from that place,
    When I perceived the mount was hollowed out
    In fashion as the valleys here are hollowed.

“Thitherward,” said that shade, “will we repair,
    Where of itself the hill-side makes a lap,
    And there for the new day will we await.”

’Twixt hill and plain there was a winding path
    Which led us to the margin of that dell,
    Where dies the border more than half away.

Gold and fine silver, and scarlet and pearl-white,
    The Indian wood resplendent and serene,
    Fresh emerald the moment it is broken,

By herbage and by flowers within that hollow
    Planted, each one in colour would be vanquished,
    As by its greater vanquished is the less.

Nor in that place had nature painted only,
    But of the sweetness of a thousand odours
    Made there a mingled fragrance and unknown.

“Salve Regina,” on the green and flowers
    There seated, singing, spirits I beheld,
    Which were not visible outside the valley.

“Before the scanty sun now seeks his nest,”
    Began the Mantuan who had led us thither,
    “Among them do not wish me to conduct you.

Better from off this ledge the acts and faces
    Of all of them will you discriminate,
    Than in the plain below received among them.

He who sits highest, and the semblance bears
    Of having what he should have done neglected,
    And to the others’ song moves not his lips,

Rudolph the Emperor was, who had the power
    To heal the wounds that Italy have slain,
    So that through others slowly she revives.

The other, who in look doth comfort him,
    Governed the region where the water springs,
    The Moldau bears the Elbe, and Elbe the sea.

His name was Ottocar; and in swaddling-clothes
    Far better he than bearded Winceslaus
    His son, who feeds in luxury and ease.

And the small-nosed, who close in council seems
    With him that has an aspect so benign,
    Died fleeing and disflowering the lily;

Look there, how he is beating at his breast!
    Behold the other one, who for his cheek
    Sighing has made of his own palm a bed;

Father and father-in-law of France’s Pest
    Are they, and know his vicious life and lewd,
    And hence proceeds the grief that so doth pierce them.

He who appears so stalwart, and chimes in,
    Singing, with that one of the manly nose,
    The cord of every valour wore begirt;

And if as King had after him remained
    The stripling who in rear of him is sitting,
    Well had the valour passed from vase to vase,

Which cannot of the other heirs be said.
    Frederick and Jacomo possess the realms,
    But none the better heritage possesses.

Not oftentimes upriseth through the branches
    The probity of man; and this He wills
    Who gives it, so that we may ask of Him.

Eke to the large-nosed reach my words, no less
    Than to the other, Pier, who with him sings;
    Whence Provence and Apulia grieve already

The plant is as inferior to its seed,
    As more than Beatrice and Margaret
    Costanza boasteth of her husband still.

Behold the monarch of the simple life,
    Harry of England, sitting there alone;
    He in his branches has a better issue.

He who the lowest on the ground among them
    Sits looking upward, is the Marquis William,
    For whose sake Alessandria and her war

Make Monferrat and Canavese weep.”







’Twas now the hour that turneth back desire
    In those who sail the sea, and melts the heart,
    The day they’ve said to their sweet friends farewell,

And the new pilgrim penetrates with love,
    If he doth hear from far away a bell
    That seemeth to deplore the dying day,

When I began to make of no avail
    My hearing, and to watch one of the souls
    Uprisen, that begged attention with its hand.

It joined and lifted upward both its palms,
    Fixing its eyes upon the orient,
    As if it said to God, “Naught else I care for.”

“Te lucis ante” so devoutly issued
    Forth from its mouth, and with such dulcet notes,
    It made me issue forth from my own mind.

And then the others, sweetly and devoutly,
    Accompanied it through all the hymn entire,
    Having their eyes on the supernal wheels.

Here, Reader, fix thine eyes well on the truth,
    For now indeed so subtile is the veil,
    Surely to penetrate within is easy.

I saw that army of the gentle-born
    Thereafterward in silence upward gaze,
    As if in expectation, pale and humble;

And from on high come forth and down descend,
    I saw two Angels with two flaming swords,
    Truncated and deprived of their points.

Green as the little leaflets just now born
    Their garments were, which, by their verdant pinions
    Beaten and blown abroad, they trailed behind.

One just above us came to take his station,
    And one descended to the opposite bank,
    So that the people were contained between them.

Clearly in them discerned I the blond head;
    But in their faces was the eye bewildered,
    As faculty confounded by excess.

“From Mary’s bosom both of them have come,”
    Sordello said, “as guardians of the valley
    Against the serpent, that will come anon.”

Whereupon I, who knew not by what road,
    Turned round about, and closely drew myself,
    Utterly frozen, to the faithful shoulders.

And once again Sordello: “Now descend we
    ’Mid the grand shades, and we will speak to them;
    Right pleasant will it be for them to see you.”

Only three steps I think that I descended,
    And was below, and saw one who was looking
    Only at me, as if he fain would know me.

Already now the air was growing dark,
    But not so that between his eyes and mine
    It did not show what it before locked up.

Tow’rds me he moved, and I tow’rds him did move;
    Noble Judge Nino! how it me delighted,
    When I beheld thee not among the damned!

No greeting fair was left unsaid between us;
    Then asked he: “How long is it since thou camest
    O’er the far waters to the mountain’s foot?”

“Oh!” said I to him, “through the dismal places
    I came this morn; and am in the first life,
    Albeit the other, going thus, I gain.”

And on the instant my reply was heard,
    He and Sordello both shrank back from me,
    Like people who are suddenly bewildered.

One to Virgilius, and the other turned
    To one who sat there, crying, “Up, Currado!
    Come and behold what God in grace has willed!”

Then, turned to me: “By that especial grace
    Thou owest unto Him, who so conceals
    His own first wherefore, that it has no ford,

When thou shalt be beyond the waters wide,
    Tell my Giovanna that she pray for me,
    Where answer to the innocent is made.

I do not think her mother loves me more,
    Since she has laid aside her wimple white,
    Which she, unhappy, needs must wish again.

Through her full easily is comprehended
    How long in woman lasts the fire of love,
    If eye or touch do not relight it often.

So fair a hatchment will not make for her
    The Viper marshalling the Milanese
    A-field, as would have made Gallura’s Cock.”

In this wise spake he, with the stamp impressed
    Upon his aspect of that righteous zeal
    Which measurably burneth in the heart.

My greedy eyes still wandered up to heaven,
    Still to that point where slowest are the stars,
    Even as a wheel the nearest to its axle.

And my Conductor: “Son, what dost thou gaze at
    Up there?”  And I to him: “At those three torches
    With which this hither pole is all on fire.”

And he to me: “The four resplendent stars
    Thou sawest this morning are down yonder low,
    And these have mounted up to where those were.”

As he was speaking, to himself Sordello
    Drew him, and said, “Lo there our Adversary!”
    And pointed with his finger to look thither.

Upon the side on which the little valley
    No barrier hath, a serpent was; perchance
    The same which gave to Eve the bitter food.

’Twixt grass and flowers came on the evil streak,
    Turning at times its head about, and licking
    Its back like to a beast that smoothes itself.

I did not see, and therefore cannot say
    How the celestial falcons ’gan to move,
    But well I saw that they were both in motion.

Hearing the air cleft by their verdant wings,
    The serpent fled, and round the Angels wheeled,
    Up to their stations flying back alike.

The shade that to the Judge had near approached
    When he had called, throughout that whole assault
    Had not a moment loosed its gaze on me.

“So may the light that leadeth thee on high
    Find in thine own free-will as much of wax
    As needful is up to the highest azure,”

Began it, “if some true intelligence
    Of Valdimagra or its neighbourhood
    Thou knowest, tell it me, who once was great there.

Currado Malaspina was I called;
    I’m not the elder, but from him descended;
    To mine I bore the love which here refineth.”

“O,” said I unto him, “through your domains
    I never passed, but where is there a dwelling
    Throughout all Europe, where they are not known?

That fame, which doeth honour to your house,
    Proclaims its Signors and proclaims its land,
    So that he knows of them who ne’er was there.

And, as I hope for heaven, I swear to you
    Your honoured family in naught abates
    The glory of the purse and of the sword.

It is so privileged by use and nature,
    That though a guilty head misguide the world,
    Sole it goes right, and scorns the evil way.”

And he: “Now go; for the sun shall not lie
    Seven times upon the pillow which the Ram
    With all his four feet covers and bestrides,

Before that such a courteous opinion
    Shall in the middle of thy head be nailed
    With greater nails than of another’s speech,

Unless the course of justice standeth still.”







The concubine of old Tithonus now
    Gleamed white upon the eastern balcony,
    Forth from the arms of her sweet paramour;

With gems her forehead all relucent was,
    Set in the shape of that cold animal
    Which with its tail doth smite amain the nations,

And of the steps, with which she mounts, the Night
    Had taken two in that place where we were,
    And now the third was bending down its wings;

When I, who something had of Adam in me,
    Vanquished by sleep, upon the grass reclined,
    There were all five of us already sat.

Just at the hour when her sad lay begins
    The little swallow, near unto the morning,
    Perchance in memory of her former woes,

And when the mind of man, a wanderer
    More from the flesh, and less by thought imprisoned,
    Almost prophetic in its visions is,

In dreams it seemed to me I saw suspended
    An eagle in the sky, with plumes of gold,
    With wings wide open, and intent to stoop,

And this, it seemed to me, was where had been
    By Ganymede his kith and kin abandoned,
    When to the high consistory he was rapt.

I thought within myself, perchance he strikes
    From habit only here, and from elsewhere
    Disdains to bear up any in his feet.

Then wheeling somewhat more, it seemed to me,
    Terrible as the lightning he descended,
    And snatched me upward even to the fire.

Therein it seemed that he and I were burning,
    And the imagined fire did scorch me so,
    That of necessity my sleep was broken.

Not otherwise Achilles started up,
    Around him turning his awakened eyes,
    And knowing not the place in which he was,

What time from Chiron stealthily his mother
    Carried him sleeping in her arms to Scyros,
    Wherefrom the Greeks withdrew him afterwards,

Than I upstarted, when from off my face
    Sleep fled away; and pallid I became,
    As doth the man who freezes with affright.

Only my Comforter was at my side,
    And now the sun was more than two hours high,
    And turned towards the sea-shore was my face.

“Be not intimidated,” said my Lord,
    “Be reassured, for all is well with us;
    Do not restrain, but put forth all thy strength.

Thou hast at length arrived at Purgatory;
    See there the cliff that closes it around;
    See there the entrance, where it seems disjoined.

Whilom at dawn, which doth precede the day,
    When inwardly thy spirit was asleep
    Upon the flowers that deck the land below,

There came a Lady and said: ‘I am Lucia;
    Let me take this one up, who is asleep;
    So will I make his journey easier for him.’

Sordello and the other noble shapes
    Remained; she took thee, and, as day grew bright,
    Upward she came, and I upon her footsteps.

She laid thee here; and first her beauteous eyes
    That open entrance pointed out to me;
    Then she and sleep together went away.”

In guise of one whose doubts are reassured,
    And who to confidence his fear doth change,
    After the truth has been discovered to him,

So did I change; and when without disquiet
    My Leader saw me, up along the cliff
    He moved, and I behind him, tow’rd the height.

Reader, thou seest well how I exalt
    My theme, and therefore if with greater art
    I fortify it, marvel not thereat.

Nearer approached we, and were in such place,
    That there, where first appeared to me a rift
    Like to a crevice that disparts a wall,

I saw a portal, and three stairs beneath,
    Diverse in colour, to go up to it,
    And a gate-keeper, who yet spake no word.

And as I opened more and more mine eyes,
    I saw him seated on the highest stair,
    Such in the face that I endured it not.

And in his hand he had a naked sword,
    Which so reflected back the sunbeams tow’rds us,
    That oft in vain I lifted up mine eyes.

“Tell it from where you are, what is’t you wish?”
    Began he to exclaim; “where is the escort?
    Take heed your coming hither harm you not!”

“A Lady of Heaven, with these things conversant,”
    My Master answered him, “but even now
    Said to us, ‘Thither go; there is the portal.’”

“And may she speed your footsteps in all good,”
    Again began the courteous janitor;
    “Come forward then unto these stairs of ours.”

Thither did we approach; and the first stair
    Was marble white, so polished and so smooth,
    I mirrored myself therein as I appear.

The second, tinct of deeper hue than perse,
    Was of a calcined and uneven stone,
    Cracked all asunder lengthwise and across.

The third, that uppermost rests massively,
    Porphyry seemed to me, as flaming red
    As blood that from a vein is spirting forth.

Both of his feet was holding upon this
    The Angel of God, upon the threshold seated,
    Which seemed to me a stone of diamond.

Along the three stairs upward with good will
    Did my Conductor draw me, saying: “Ask
    Humbly that he the fastening may undo.”

Devoutly at the holy feet I cast me,
    For mercy’s sake besought that he would open,
    But first upon my breast three times I smote.

Seven P’s upon my forehead he described
    With the sword’s point, and, “Take heed that thou wash
    These wounds, when thou shalt be within,” he said.

Ashes, or earth that dry is excavated,
    Of the same colour were with his attire,
    And from beneath it he drew forth two keys.

One was of gold, and the other was of silver;
    First with the white, and after with the yellow,
    Plied he the door, so that I was content.

“Whenever faileth either of these keys
    So that it turn not rightly in the lock,”
    He said to us, “this entrance doth not open.

More precious one is, but the other needs
    More art and intellect ere it unlock,
    For it is that which doth the knot unloose.

From Peter I have them; and he bade me err
    Rather in opening than in keeping shut,
    If people but fall down before my feet.”

Then pushed the portals of the sacred door,
    Exclaiming: “Enter; but I give you warning
    That forth returns whoever looks behind.”

And when upon their hinges were turned round
    The swivels of that consecrated gate,
    Which are of metal, massive and sonorous,

Roared not so loud, nor so discordant seemed
    Tarpeia, when was ta’en from it the good
    Metellus, wherefore meagre it remained.

At the first thunder-peal I turned attentive,
    And “Te Deum laudamus” seemed to hear
    In voices mingled with sweet melody.

Exactly such an image rendered me
    That which I heard, as we are wont to catch,
    When people singing with the organ stand;

For now we hear, and now hear not, the words.







When we had crossed the threshold of the door
    Which the perverted love of souls disuses,
    Because it makes the crooked way seem straight,

Re-echoing I heard it closed again;
    And if I had turned back mine eyes upon it,
    What for my failing had been fit excuse?

We mounted upward through a rifted rock,
    Which undulated to this side and that,
    Even as a wave receding and advancing.

“Here it behoves us use a little art,”
    Began my Leader, “to adapt ourselves
    Now here, now there, to the receding side.”

And this our footsteps so infrequent made,
    That sooner had the moon’s decreasing disk
    Regained its bed to sink again to rest,

Than we were forth from out that needle’s eye;
    But when we free and in the open were,
    There where the mountain backward piles itself,

I wearied out, and both of us uncertain
    About our way, we stopped upon a plain
    More desolate than roads across the deserts.

From where its margin borders on the void,
    To foot of the high bank that ever rises,
    A human body three times told would measure;

And far as eye of mine could wing its flight,
    Now on the left, and on the right flank now,
    The same this cornice did appear to me.

Thereon our feet had not been moved as yet,
    When I perceived the embankment round about,
    Which all right of ascent had interdicted,

To be of marble white, and so adorned
    With sculptures, that not only Polycletus,
    But Nature’s self, had there been put to shame.

The Angel, who came down to earth with tidings
    Of peace, that had been wept for many a year,
    And opened Heaven from its long interdict,

In front of us appeared so truthfully
    There sculptured in a gracious attitude,
    He did not seem an image that is silent.

One would have sworn that he was saying, “Ave;”
    For she was there in effigy portrayed
    Who turned the key to ope the exalted love,

And in her mien this language had impressed,
    “Ecce ancilla Dei,” as distinctly
    As any figure stamps itself in wax.

“Keep not thy mind upon one place alone,”
    The gentle Master said, who had me standing
    Upon that side where people have their hearts;

Whereat I moved mine eyes, and I beheld
    In rear of Mary, and upon that side
    Where he was standing who conducted me,

Another story on the rock imposed;
    Wherefore I passed Virgilius and drew near,
    So that before mine eyes it might be set.

There sculptured in the self-same marble were
    The cart and oxen, drawing the holy ark,
    Wherefore one dreads an office not appointed.

People appeared in front, and all of them
    In seven choirs divided, of two senses
    Made one say “No,” the other, “Yes, they sing.”

Likewise unto the smoke of the frankincense,
    Which there was imaged forth, the eyes and nose
    Were in the yes and no discordant made.

Preceded there the vessel benedight,
    Dancing with girded loins, the humble Psalmist,
    And more and less than King was he in this.

Opposite, represented at the window
    Of a great palace, Michal looked upon him,
    Even as a woman scornful and afflicted.

I moved my feet from where I had been standing,
    To examine near at hand another story,
    Which after Michal glimmered white upon me.

There the high glory of the Roman Prince
    Was chronicled, whose great beneficence
    Moved Gregory to his great victory;

’Tis of the Emperor Trajan I am speaking;
    And a poor widow at his bridle stood,
    In attitude of weeping and of grief.

Around about him seemed it thronged and full
    Of cavaliers, and the eagles in the gold
    Above them visibly in the wind were moving.

The wretched woman in the midst of these
    Seemed to be saying: “Give me vengeance, Lord,
    For my dead son, for whom my heart is breaking.”

And he to answer her: “Now wait until
    I shall return.”  And she: “My Lord,” like one
    In whom grief is impatient, “shouldst thou not

Return?”  And he: “Who shall be where I am
    Will give it thee.”  And she: “Good deed of others
    What boots it thee, if thou neglect thine own?”

Whence he: “Now comfort thee, for it behoves me
    That I discharge my duty ere I move;
    Justice so wills, and pity doth retain me.”

He who on no new thing has ever looked
    Was the creator of this visible language,
    Novel to us, for here it is not found.

While I delighted me in contemplating
    The images of such humility,
    And dear to look on for their Maker’s sake,

“Behold, upon this side, but rare they make
    Their steps,” the Poet murmured, “many people;
    These will direct us to the lofty stairs.”

Mine eyes, that in beholding were intent
    To see new things, of which they curious are,
    In turning round towards him were not slow.

But still I wish not, Reader, thou shouldst swerve
    From thy good purposes, because thou hearest
    How God ordaineth that the debt be paid;

Attend not to the fashion of the torment,
    Think of what follows; think that at the worst
    It cannot reach beyond the mighty sentence.

“Master,” began I, “that which I behold
    Moving towards us seems to me not persons,
    And what I know not, so in sight I waver.”

And he to me: “The grievous quality
    Of this their torment bows them so to earth,
    That my own eyes at first contended with it;

But look there fixedly, and disentangle
    By sight what cometh underneath those stones;
    Already canst thou see how each is stricken.”

O ye proud Christians! wretched, weary ones!
    Who, in the vision of the mind infirm
    Confidence have in your backsliding steps,

Do ye not comprehend that we are worms,
    Born to bring forth the angelic butterfly
    That flieth unto judgment without screen?

Why floats aloft your spirit high in air?
    Like are ye unto insects undeveloped,
    Even as the worm in whom formation fails!

As to sustain a ceiling or a roof,
    In place of corbel, oftentimes a figure
    Is seen to join its knees unto its breast,

Which makes of the unreal real anguish
    Arise in him who sees it, fashioned thus
    Beheld I those, when I had ta’en good heed.

True is it, they were more or less bent down,
    According as they more or less were laden;
    And he who had most patience in his looks

Weeping did seem to say, “I can no more!”






“Our Father, thou who dwellest in the heavens,
    Not circumscribed, but from the greater love
    Thou bearest to the first effects on high,

Praised be thy name and thine omnipotence
    By every creature, as befitting is
    To render thanks to thy sweet effluence.

Come unto us the peace of thy dominion,
    For unto it we cannot of ourselves,
    If it come not, with all our intellect.

Even as thine own Angels of their will
    Make sacrifice to thee, Hosanna singing,
    So may all men make sacrifice of theirs.

Give unto us this day our daily manna,
    Withouten which in this rough wilderness
    Backward goes he who toils most to advance.

And even as we the trespass we have suffered
    Pardon in one another, pardon thou
    Benignly, and regard not our desert.

Our virtue, which is easily o’ercome,
    Put not to proof with the old Adversary,
    But thou from him who spurs it so, deliver.

This last petition verily, dear Lord,
    Not for ourselves is made, who need it not,
    But for their sake who have remained behind us.”

Thus for themselves and us good furtherance
    Those shades imploring, went beneath a weight
    Like unto that of which we sometimes dream,

Unequally in anguish round and round
    And weary all, upon that foremost cornice,
    Purging away the smoke-stains of the world.

If there good words are always said for us,
    What may not here be said and done for them,
    By those who have a good root to their will?

Well may we help them wash away the marks
    That hence they carried, so that clean and light
    They may ascend unto the starry wheels!

“Ah! so may pity and justice you disburden
    Soon, that ye may have power to move the wing,
    That shall uplift you after your desire,

Show us on which hand tow’rd the stairs the way
    Is shortest, and if more than one the passes,
    Point us out that which least abruptly falls;

For he who cometh with me, through the burden
    Of Adam’s flesh wherewith he is invested,
    Against his will is chary of his climbing.”

The words of theirs which they returned to those
    That he whom I was following had spoken,
    It was not manifest from whom they came,

But it was said: “To the right hand come with us
    Along the bank, and ye shall find a pass
    Possible for living person to ascend.

And were I not impeded by the stone,
    Which this proud neck of mine doth subjugate,
    Whence I am forced to hold my visage down,

Him, who still lives and does not name himself,
    Would I regard, to see if I may know him
    And make him piteous unto this burden.

A Latian was I, and born of a great Tuscan;
    Guglielmo Aldobrandeschi was my father;
    I know not if his name were ever with you.

The ancient blood and deeds of gallantry
    Of my progenitors so arrogant made me
    That, thinking not upon the common mother,

All men I held in scorn to such extent
    I died therefor, as know the Sienese,
    And every child in Campagnatico.

I am Omberto; and not to me alone
    Has pride done harm, but all my kith and kin
    Has with it dragged into adversity.

And here must I this burden bear for it
    Till God be satisfied, since I did not
    Among the living, here among the dead.”

Listening I downward bent my countenance;
    And one of them, not this one who was speaking,
    Twisted himself beneath the weight that cramps him,

And looked at me, and knew me, and called out,
    Keeping his eyes laboriously fixed
    On me, who all bowed down was going with them.

“O,” asked I him, “art thou not Oderisi,
    Agobbio’s honour, and honour of that art
    Which is in Paris called illuminating?”

“Brother,” said he, “more laughing are the leaves
    Touched by the brush of Franco Bolognese;
    All his the honour now, and mine in part.

In sooth I had not been so courteous
    While I was living, for the great desire
    Of excellence, on which my heart was bent.

Here of such pride is paid the forfeiture;
    And yet I should not be here, were it not
    That, having power to sin, I turned to God.

O thou vain glory of the human powers,
    How little green upon thy summit lingers,
    If’t be not followed by an age of grossness!

In painting Cimabue thought that he
    Should hold the field, now Giotto has the cry,
    So that the other’s fame is growing dim.

So has one Guido from the other taken
    The glory of our tongue, and he perchance
    Is born, who from the nest shall chase them both.

Naught is this mundane rumour but a breath
    Of wind, that comes now this way and now that,
    And changes name, because it changes side.

What fame shalt thou have more, if old peel off
    From thee thy flesh, than if thou hadst been dead
    Before thou left the ‘pappo’ and the ‘dindi,’

Ere pass a thousand years? which is a shorter
    Space to the eterne, than twinkling of an eye
    Unto the circle that in heaven wheels slowest.

With him, who takes so little of the road
    In front of me, all Tuscany resounded;
    And now he scarce is lisped of in Siena,

Where he was lord, what time was overthrown
    The Florentine delirium, that superb
    Was at that day as now ’tis prostitute.

Your reputation is the colour of grass
    Which comes and goes, and that discolours it
    By which it issues green from out the earth.”

And I: “Thy true speech fills my heart with good
    Humility, and great tumour thou assuagest;
    But who is he, of whom just now thou spakest?”

“That,” he replied, “is Provenzan Salvani,
    And he is here because he had presumed
    To bring Siena all into his hands.

He has gone thus, and goeth without rest
    E’er since he died; such money renders back
    In payment he who is on earth too daring.”

And I: “If every spirit who awaits
    The verge of life before that he repent,
    Remains below there and ascends not hither,

(Unless good orison shall him bestead,)
    Until as much time as he lived be passed,
    How was the coming granted him in largess?”

“When he in greatest splendour lived,” said he,
    “Freely upon the Campo of Siena,
    All shame being laid aside, he placed himself;

And there to draw his friend from the duress
    Which in the prison-house of Charles he suffered,
    He brought himself to tremble in each vein.

I say no more, and know that I speak darkly;
    Yet little time shall pass before thy neighbours
    Will so demean themselves that thou canst gloss it.

This action has released him from those confines.”







Abreast, like oxen going in a yoke,
    I with that heavy-laden soul went on,
    As long as the sweet pedagogue permitted;

But when he said, “Leave him, and onward pass,
    For here ’tis good that with the sail and oars,
    As much as may be, each push on his barque;”

Upright, as walking wills it, I redressed
    My person, notwithstanding that my thoughts
    Remained within me downcast and abashed.

I had moved on, and followed willingly
    The footsteps of my Master, and we both
    Already showed how light of foot we were,

When unto me he said: “Cast down thine eyes;
    ’Twere well for thee, to alleviate the way,
    To look upon the bed beneath thy feet.”

As, that some memory may exist of them,
    Above the buried dead their tombs in earth
    Bear sculptured on them what they were before;

Whence often there we weep for them afresh,
    From pricking of remembrance, which alone
    To the compassionate doth set its spur;

So saw I there, but of a better semblance
    In point of artifice, with figures covered
    Whate’er as pathway from the mount projects.

I saw that one who was created noble
    More than all other creatures, down from heaven
    Flaming with lightnings fall upon one side.

I saw Briareus smitten by the dart
    Celestial, lying on the other side,
    Heavy upon the earth by mortal frost.

I saw Thymbraeus, Pallas saw, and Mars,
    Still clad in armour round about their father,
    Gaze at the scattered members of the giants.

I saw, at foot of his great labour, Nimrod,
    As if bewildered, looking at the people
    Who had been proud with him in Sennaar.

O Niobe! with what afflicted eyes
    Thee I beheld upon the pathway traced,
    Between thy seven and seven children slain!

O Saul! how fallen upon thy proper sword
    Didst thou appear there lifeless in Gilboa,
    That felt thereafter neither rain nor dew!

O mad Arachne! so I thee beheld
    E’en then half spider, sad upon the shreds
    Of fabric wrought in evil hour for thee!

O Rehoboam! no more seems to threaten
    Thine image there; but full of consternation
    A chariot bears it off, when none pursues!

Displayed moreo’er the adamantine pavement
    How unto his own mother made Alcmaeon
    Costly appear the luckless ornament;

Displayed how his own sons did throw themselves
    Upon Sennacherib within the temple,
    And how, he being dead, they left him there;

Displayed the ruin and the cruel carnage
    That Tomyris wrought, when she to Cyrus said,
    “Blood didst thou thirst for, and with blood I glut thee!”

Displayed how routed fled the Assyrians
    After that Holofernes had been slain,
    And likewise the remainder of that slaughter.

I saw there Troy in ashes and in caverns;
    O Ilion! thee, how abject and debased,
    Displayed the image that is there discerned!

Whoe’er of pencil master was or stile,
    That could portray the shades and traits which there
    Would cause each subtile genius to admire?

Dead seemed the dead, the living seemed alive;
    Better than I saw not who saw the truth,
    All that I trod upon while bowed I went.

Now wax ye proud, and on with looks uplifted,
    Ye sons of Eve, and bow not down your faces
    So that ye may behold your evil ways!

More of the mount by us was now encompassed,
    And far more spent the circuit of the sun,
    Than had the mind preoccupied imagined,

When he, who ever watchful in advance
    Was going on, began: “Lift up thy head,
    ’Tis no more time to go thus meditating.

Lo there an Angel who is making haste
    To come towards us; lo, returning is
    From service of the day the sixth handmaiden.

With reverence thine acts and looks adorn,
    So that he may delight to speed us upward;
    Think that this day will never dawn again.”

I was familiar with his admonition
    Ever to lose no time; so on this theme
    He could not unto me speak covertly.

Towards us came the being beautiful
    Vested in white, and in his countenance
    Such as appears the tremulous morning star.

His arms he opened, and opened then his wings;
    “Come,” said he, “near at hand here are the steps,
    And easy from henceforth is the ascent.”

At this announcement few are they who come!
    O human creatures, born to soar aloft,
    Why fall ye thus before a little wind?

He led us on to where the rock was cleft;
    There smote upon my forehead with his wings,
    Then a safe passage promised unto me.

As on the right hand, to ascend the mount
    Where seated is the church that lordeth it
    O’er the well-guided, above Rubaconte,

The bold abruptness of the ascent is broken
    By stairways that were made there in the age
    When still were safe the ledger and the stave,

E’en thus attempered is the bank which falls
    Sheer downward from the second circle there;
    But on this, side and that the high rock graze.

As we were turning thitherward our persons,
    “Beati pauperes spiritu,” voices
    Sang in such wise that speech could tell it not.

Ah me! how different are these entrances
    From the Infernal! for with anthems here
    One enters, and below with wild laments.

We now were hunting up the sacred stairs,
    And it appeared to me by far more easy
    Than on the plain it had appeared before.

Whence I: “My Master, say, what heavy thing
    Has been uplifted from me, so that hardly
    Aught of fatigue is felt by me in walking?”

He answered: “When the P’s which have remained
    Still on thy face almost obliterate
    Shall wholly, as the first is, be erased,

Thy feet will be so vanquished by good will,
    That not alone they shall not feel fatigue,
    But urging up will be to them delight.”

Then did I even as they do who are going
    With something on the head to them unknown,
    Unless the signs of others make them doubt,

Wherefore the hand to ascertain is helpful,
    And seeks and finds, and doth fulfill the office
    Which cannot be accomplished by the sight;

And with the fingers of the right hand spread
    I found but six the letters, that had carved
    Upon my temples he who bore the keys;

Upon beholding which my Leader smiled.







We were upon the summit of the stairs,
    Where for the second time is cut away
    The mountain, which ascending shriveth all.

There in like manner doth a cornice bind
    The hill all round about, as does the first,
    Save that its arc more suddenly is curved.

Shade is there none, nor sculpture that appears;
    So seems the bank, and so the road seems smooth,
    With but the livid colour of the stone.

“If to inquire we wait for people here,”
    The Poet said, “I fear that peradventure
    Too much delay will our election have.”

Then steadfast on the sun his eyes he fixed,
    Made his right side the centre of his motion,
    And turned the left part of himself about.

“O thou sweet light! with trust in whom I enter
    Upon this novel journey, do thou lead us,”
    Said he, “as one within here should be led.

Thou warmest the world, thou shinest over it;
    If other reason prompt not otherwise,
    Thy rays should evermore our leaders be!”

As much as here is counted for a mile,
    So much already there had we advanced
    In little time, by dint of ready will;

And tow’rds us there were heard to fly, albeit
    They were not visible, spirits uttering
    Unto Love’s table courteous invitations,

The first voice that passed onward in its flight,
    “Vinum non habent,” said in accents loud,
    And went reiterating it behind us.

And ere it wholly grew inaudible
    Because of distance, passed another, crying,
    “I am Orestes!” and it also stayed not.

“O,” said I, “Father, these, what voices are they?”
    And even as I asked, behold the third,
    Saying: “Love those from whom ye have had evil!”

And the good Master said: “This circle scourges
    The sin of envy, and on that account
    Are drawn from love the lashes of the scourge.

The bridle of another sound shall be;
    I think that thou wilt hear it, as I judge,
    Before thou comest to the Pass of Pardon.

But fix thine eyes athwart the air right steadfast,
    And people thou wilt see before us sitting,
    And each one close against the cliff is seated.”

Then wider than at first mine eyes I opened;
    I looked before me, and saw shades with mantles
    Not from the colour of the stone diverse.

And when we were a little farther onward,
    I heard a cry of, “Mary, pray for us!”
    A cry of, “Michael, Peter, and all Saints!”

I do not think there walketh still on earth
    A man so hard, that he would not be pierced
    With pity at what afterward I saw.

For when I had approached so near to them
    That manifest to me their acts became,
    Drained was I at the eyes by heavy grief.

Covered with sackcloth vile they seemed to me,
    And one sustained the other with his shoulder,
    And all of them were by the bank sustained.

Thus do the blind, in want of livelihood,
    Stand at the doors of churches asking alms,
    And one upon another leans his head,

So that in others pity soon may rise,
    Not only at the accent of their words,
    But at their aspect, which no less implores.

And as unto the blind the sun comes not,
    So to the shades, of whom just now I spake,
    Heaven’s light will not be bounteous of itself;

For all their lids an iron wire transpierces,
    And sews them up, as to a sparhawk wild
    Is done, because it will not quiet stay.

To me it seemed, in passing, to do outrage,
    Seeing the others without being seen;
    Wherefore I turned me to my counsel sage.

Well knew he what the mute one wished to say,
    And therefore waited not for my demand,
    But said: “Speak, and be brief, and to the point.”

I had Virgilius upon that side
    Of the embankment from which one may fall,
    Since by no border ’tis engarlanded;

Upon the other side of me I had
    The shades devout, who through the horrible seam
    Pressed out the tears so that they bathed their cheeks.

To them I turned me, and, “O people, certain,”
    Began I, “of beholding the high light,
    Which your desire has solely in its care,

So may grace speedily dissolve the scum
    Upon your consciences, that limpidly
    Through them descend the river of the mind,

Tell me, for dear ’twill be to me and gracious,
    If any soul among you here is Latian,
    And ’twill perchance be good for him I learn it.”

“O brother mine, each one is citizen
    Of one true city; but thy meaning is,
    Who may have lived in Italy a pilgrim.”

By way of answer this I seemed to hear
    A little farther on than where I stood,
    Whereat I made myself still nearer heard.

Among the rest I saw a shade that waited
    In aspect, and should any one ask how,
    Its chin it lifted upward like a blind man.

“Spirit,” I said, “who stoopest to ascend,
    If thou art he who did reply to me,
    Make thyself known to me by place or name.”

“Sienese was I,” it replied, “and with
    The others here recleanse my guilty life,
    Weeping to Him to lend himself to us.

Sapient I was not, although I Sapia
    Was called, and I was at another’s harm
    More happy far than at my own good fortune.

And that thou mayst not think that I deceive thee,
    Hear if I was as foolish as I tell thee.
    The arc already of my years descending,

My fellow-citizens near unto Colle
    Were joined in battle with their adversaries,
    And I was praying God for what he willed.

Routed were they, and turned into the bitter
    Passes of flight; and I, the chase beholding,
    A joy received unequalled by all others;

So that I lifted upward my bold face
    Crying to God, ‘Henceforth I fear thee not,’
    As did the blackbird at the little sunshine.

Peace I desired with God at the extreme
    Of my existence, and as yet would not
    My debt have been by penitence discharged,

Had it not been that in remembrance held me
    Pier Pettignano in his holy prayers,
    Who out of charity was grieved for me.

But who art thou, that into our conditions
    Questioning goest, and hast thine eyes unbound
    As I believe, and breathing dost discourse?”

“Mine eyes,” I said, “will yet be here ta’en from me,
    But for short space; for small is the offence
    Committed by their being turned with envy.

Far greater is the fear, wherein suspended
    My soul is, of the torment underneath,
    For even now the load down there weighs on me.”

And she to me: “Who led thee, then, among us
    Up here, if to return below thou thinkest?”
    And I: “He who is with me, and speaks not;

And living am I; therefore ask of me,
    Spirit elect, if thou wouldst have me move
    O’er yonder yet my mortal feet for thee.”

“O, this is such a novel thing to hear,”
    She answered, “that great sign it is God loves thee;
    Therefore with prayer of thine sometimes assist me.

And I implore, by what thou most desirest,
    If e’er thou treadest the soil of Tuscany,
    Well with my kindred reinstate my fame.

Them wilt thou see among that people vain
    Who hope in Talamone, and will lose there
    More hope than in discovering the Diana;

But there still more the admirals will lose.”







“Who is this one that goes about our mountain,
    Or ever Death has given him power of flight,
    And opes his eyes and shuts them at his will?”

“I know not who, but know he’s not alone;
    Ask him thyself, for thou art nearer to him,
    And gently, so that he may speak, accost him.”

Thus did two spirits, leaning tow’rds each other,
    Discourse about me there on the right hand;
    Then held supine their faces to address me.

And said the one: “O soul, that, fastened still
    Within the body, tow’rds the heaven art going,
    For charity console us, and declare

Whence comest and who art thou; for thou mak’st us
    As much to marvel at this grace of thine
    As must a thing that never yet has been.”

And I: “Through midst of Tuscany there wanders
    A streamlet that is born in Falterona,
    And not a hundred miles of course suffice it;

From thereupon do I this body bring.
    To tell you who I am were speech in vain,
    Because my name as yet makes no great noise.”

“If well thy meaning I can penetrate
    With intellect of mine,” then answered me
    He who first spake, “thou speakest of the Arno.”

And said the other to him: “Why concealed
    This one the appellation of that river,
    Even as a man doth of things horrible?”

And thus the shade that questioned was of this
    Himself acquitted: “I know not; but truly
    ’Tis fit the name of such a valley perish;

For from its fountain-head (where is so pregnant
    The Alpine mountain whence is cleft Peloro
    That in few places it that mark surpasses)

To where it yields itself in restoration
    Of what the heaven doth of the sea dry up,
    Whence have the rivers that which goes with them,

Virtue is like an enemy avoided
    By all, as is a serpent, through misfortune
    Of place, or through bad habit that impels them;

On which account have so transformed their nature
    The dwellers in that miserable valley,
    It seems that Circe had them in her pasture.

’Mid ugly swine, of acorns worthier
    Than other food for human use created,
    It first directeth its impoverished way.

Curs findeth it thereafter, coming downward,
    More snarling than their puissance demands,
    And turns from them disdainfully its muzzle.

It goes on falling, and the more it grows,
    The more it finds the dogs becoming wolves,
    This maledict and misadventurous ditch.

Descended then through many a hollow gulf,
    It finds the foxes so replete with fraud,
    They fear no cunning that may master them.

Nor will I cease because another hears me;
    And well ’twill be for him, if still he mind him
    Of what a truthful spirit to me unravels.

Thy grandson I behold, who doth become
    A hunter of those wolves upon the bank
    Of the wild stream, and terrifies them all.

He sells their flesh, it being yet alive;
    Thereafter slaughters them like ancient beeves;
    Many of life, himself of praise, deprives.

Blood-stained he issues from the dismal forest;
    He leaves it such, a thousand years from now
    In its primeval state ’tis not re-wooded.”

As at the announcement of impending ills
    The face of him who listens is disturbed,
    From whate’er side the peril seize upon him;

So I beheld that other soul, which stood
    Turned round to listen, grow disturbed and sad,
    When it had gathered to itself the word.

The speech of one and aspect of the other
    Had me desirous made to know their names,
    And question mixed with prayers I made thereof,

Whereat the spirit which first spake to me
    Began again: “Thou wishest I should bring me
    To do for thee what thou’lt not do for me;

But since God willeth that in thee shine forth
    Such grace of his, I’ll not be chary with thee;
    Know, then, that I Guido del Duca am.

My blood was so with envy set on fire,
    That if I had beheld a man make merry,
    Thou wouldst have seen me sprinkled o’er with pallor.

From my own sowing such the straw I reap!
    O human race! why dost thou set thy heart
    Where interdict of partnership must be?

This is Renier; this is the boast and honour
    Of the house of Calboli, where no one since
    Has made himself the heir of his desert.

And not alone his blood is made devoid,
    ’Twixt Po and mount, and sea-shore and the Reno,
    Of good required for truth and for diversion;

For all within these boundaries is full
    Of venomous roots, so that too tardily
    By cultivation now would they diminish.

Where is good Lizio, and Arrigo Manardi,
    Pier Traversaro, and Guido di Carpigna,
    O Romagnuoli into bastards turned?

When in Bologna will a Fabbro rise?
    When in Faenza a Bernardin di Fosco,
    The noble scion of ignoble seed?

Be not astonished, Tuscan, if I weep,
    When I remember, with Guido da Prata,
    Ugolin d’ Azzo, who was living with us,

Frederick Tignoso and his company,
    The house of Traversara, and th’ Anastagi,
    And one race and the other is extinct;

The dames and cavaliers, the toils and ease
    That filled our souls with love and courtesy,
    There where the hearts have so malicious grown!

O Brettinoro! why dost thou not flee,
    Seeing that all thy family is gone,
    And many people, not to be corrupted?

Bagnacaval does well in not begetting
    And ill does Castrocaro, and Conio worse,
    In taking trouble to beget such Counts.

Will do well the Pagani, when their Devil
    Shall have departed; but not therefore pure
    Will testimony of them e’er remain.

O Ugolin de’ Fantoli, secure
    Thy name is, since no longer is awaited
    One who, degenerating, can obscure it!

But go now, Tuscan, for it now delights me
    To weep far better than it does to speak,
    So much has our discourse my mind distressed.”

We were aware that those beloved souls
    Heard us depart; therefore, by keeping silent,
    They made us of our pathway confident.

When we became alone by going onward,
    Thunder, when it doth cleave the air, appeared
    A voice, that counter to us came, exclaiming:

“Shall slay me whosoever findeth me!”
    And fled as the reverberation dies
    If suddenly the cloud asunder bursts.

As soon as hearing had a truce from this,
    Behold another, with so great a crash,
    That it resembled thunderings following fast:

“I am Aglaurus, who became a stone!”
    And then, to press myself close to the Poet,
    I backward, and not forward, took a step.

Already on all sides the air was quiet;
    And said he to me: “That was the hard curb
    That ought to hold a man within his bounds;

But you take in the bait so that the hook
    Of the old Adversary draws you to him,
    And hence availeth little curb or call.

The heavens are calling you, and wheel around you,
    Displaying to you their eternal beauties,
    And still your eye is looking on the ground;

Whence He, who all discerns, chastises you.”







As much as ’twixt the close of the third hour
    And dawn of day appeareth of that sphere
    Which aye in fashion of a child is playing,

So much it now appeared, towards the night,
    Was of his course remaining to the sun;
    There it was evening, and ’twas midnight here;

And the rays smote the middle of our faces,
    Because by us the mount was so encircled,
    That straight towards the west we now were going

When I perceived my forehead overpowered
    Beneath the splendour far more than at first,
    And stupor were to me the things unknown,

Whereat towards the summit of my brow
    I raised my hands, and made myself the visor
    Which the excessive glare diminishes.

As when from off the water, or a mirror,
    The sunbeam leaps unto the opposite side,
    Ascending upward in the selfsame measure

That it descends, and deviates as far
    From falling of a stone in line direct,
    (As demonstrate experiment and art,)

So it appeared to me that by a light
    Refracted there before me I was smitten;
    On which account my sight was swift to flee.

“What is that, Father sweet, from which I cannot
    So fully screen my sight that it avail me,”
    Said I, “and seems towards us to be moving?”

“Marvel thou not, if dazzle thee as yet
    The family of heaven,” he answered me;
    “An angel ’tis, who comes to invite us upward.

Soon will it be, that to behold these things
    Shall not be grievous, but delightful to thee
    As much as nature fashioned thee to feel.”

When we had reached the Angel benedight,
    With joyful voice he said: “Here enter in
    To stairway far less steep than are the others.”

We mounting were, already thence departed,
    And “Beati misericordes” was
    Behind us sung, “Rejoice, thou that o’ercomest!”

My Master and myself, we two alone
    Were going upward, and I thought, in going,
    Some profit to acquire from words of his;

And I to him directed me, thus asking:
    “What did the spirit of Romagna mean,
    Mentioning interdict and partnership?”

Whence he to me: “Of his own greatest failing
    He knows the harm; and therefore wonder not
    If he reprove us, that we less may rue it.

Because are thither pointed your desires
    Where by companionship each share is lessened,
    Envy doth ply the bellows to your sighs.

But if the love of the supernal sphere
    Should upwardly direct your aspiration,
    There would not be that fear within your breast;

For there, as much the more as one says ‘Our,’
    So much the more of good each one possesses,
    And more of charity in that cloister burns.”

“I am more hungering to be satisfied,”
    I said, “than if I had before been silent,
    And more of doubt within my mind I gather.

How can it be, that boon distributed
    The more possessors can more wealthy make
    Therein, than if by few it be possessed?”

And he to me: “Because thou fixest still
    Thy mind entirely upon earthly things,
    Thou pluckest darkness from the very light.

That goodness infinite and ineffable
    Which is above there, runneth unto love,
    As to a lucid body comes the sunbeam.

So much it gives itself as it finds ardour,
    So that as far as charity extends,
    O’er it increases the eternal valour.

And the more people thitherward aspire,
    More are there to love well, and more they love there,
    And, as a mirror, one reflects the other.

And if my reasoning appease thee not,
    Thou shalt see Beatrice; and she will fully
    Take from thee this and every other longing.

Endeavour, then, that soon may be extinct,
    As are the two already, the five wounds
    That close themselves again by being painful.”

Even as I wished to say, “Thou dost appease me,”
    I saw that I had reached another circle,
    So that my eager eyes made me keep silence.

There it appeared to me that in a vision
    Ecstatic on a sudden I was rapt,
    And in a temple many persons saw;

And at the door a woman, with the sweet
    Behaviour of a mother, saying: “Son,
    Why in this manner hast thou dealt with us?

Lo, sorrowing, thy father and myself
    Were seeking for thee;”—and as here she ceased,
    That which appeared at first had disappeared.

Then I beheld another with those waters
    Adown her cheeks which grief distils whenever
    From great disdain of others it is born,

And saying: “If of that city thou art lord,
    For whose name was such strife among the gods,
    And whence doth every science scintillate,

Avenge thyself on those audacious arms
    That clasped our daughter, O Pisistratus;”
    And the lord seemed to me benign and mild

To answer her with aspect temperate:
    “What shall we do to those who wish us ill,
    If he who loves us be by us condemned?”

Then saw I people hot in fire of wrath,
    With stones a young man slaying, clamorously
    Still crying to each other, “Kill him! kill him!”

And him I saw bow down, because of death
    That weighed already on him, to the earth,
    But of his eyes made ever gates to heaven,

Imploring the high Lord, in so great strife,
    That he would pardon those his persecutors,
    With such an aspect as unlocks compassion.

Soon as my soul had outwardly returned
    To things external to it which are true,
    Did I my not false errors recognize.

My Leader, who could see me bear myself
    Like to a man that rouses him from sleep,
    Exclaimed: “What ails thee, that thou canst not stand?

But hast been coming more than half a league
    Veiling thine eyes, and with thy legs entangled,
    In guise of one whom wine or sleep subdues?”

“O my sweet Father, if thou listen to me,
    I’ll tell thee,” said I, “what appeared to me,
    When thus from me my legs were ta’en away.”

And he: “If thou shouldst have a hundred masks
    Upon thy face, from me would not be shut
    Thy cogitations, howsoever small.

What thou hast seen was that thou mayst not fail
    To ope thy heart unto the waters of peace,
    Which from the eternal fountain are diffused.

I did not ask, ‘What ails thee?’ as he does
    Who only looketh with the eyes that see not
    When of the soul bereft the body lies,

But asked it to give vigour to thy feet;
    Thus must we needs urge on the sluggards, slow
    To use their wakefulness when it returns.”

We passed along, athwart the twilight peering
    Forward as far as ever eye could stretch
    Against the sunbeams serotine and lucent;

And lo! by slow degrees a smoke approached
    In our direction, sombre as the night,
    Nor was there place to hide one’s self therefrom.

This of our eyes and the pure air bereft us.







Darkness of hell, and of a night deprived
    Of every planet under a poor sky,
    As much as may be tenebrous with cloud,

Ne’er made unto my sight so thick a veil,
    As did that smoke which there enveloped us,
    Nor to the feeling of so rough a texture;

For not an eye it suffered to stay open;
    Whereat mine escort, faithful and sagacious,
    Drew near to me and offered me his shoulder.

E’en as a blind man goes behind his guide,
    Lest he should wander, or should strike against
    Aught that may harm or peradventure kill him,

So went I through the bitter and foul air,
    Listening unto my Leader, who said only,
    “Look that from me thou be not separated.”

Voices I heard, and every one appeared
    To supplicate for peace and misericord
    The Lamb of God who takes away our sins.

Still “Agnus Dei” their exordium was;
    One word there was in all, and metre one,
    So that all harmony appeared among them.

“Master,” I said, “are spirits those I hear?”
    And he to me: “Thou apprehendest truly,
    And they the knot of anger go unloosing.”

“Now who art thou, that cleavest through our smoke
    And art discoursing of us even as though
    Thou didst by calends still divide the time?”

After this manner by a voice was spoken;
    Whereon my Master said: “Do thou reply,
    And ask if on this side the way go upward.”

And I: “O creature that dost cleanse thyself
    To return beautiful to Him who made thee,
    Thou shalt hear marvels if thou follow me.”

“Thee will I follow far as is allowed me,”
    He answered; “and if smoke prevent our seeing,
    Hearing shall keep us joined instead thereof.”

Thereon began I: “With that swathing band
    Which death unwindeth am I going upward,
    And hither came I through the infernal anguish.

And if God in his grace has me infolded,
    So that he wills that I behold his court
    By method wholly out of modern usage,

Conceal not from me who ere death thou wast,
    But tell it me, and tell me if I go
    Right for the pass, and be thy words our escort.”

“Lombard was I, and I was Marco called;
    The world I knew, and loved that excellence,
    At which has each one now unbent his bow.

For mounting upward, thou art going right.”
    Thus he made answer, and subjoined: “I pray thee
    To pray for me when thou shalt be above.”

And I to him: “My faith I pledge to thee
    To do what thou dost ask me; but am bursting
    Inly with doubt, unless I rid me of it.

First it was simple, and is now made double
    By thy opinion, which makes certain to me,
    Here and elsewhere, that which I couple with it.

The world forsooth is utterly deserted
    By every virtue, as thou tellest me,
    And with iniquity is big and covered;

But I beseech thee point me out the cause,
    That I may see it, and to others show it;
    For one in the heavens, and here below one puts it.”

A sigh profound, that grief forced into Ai!
    He first sent forth, and then began he: “Brother,
    The world is blind, and sooth thou comest from it!

Ye who are living every cause refer
    Still upward to the heavens, as if all things
    They of necessity moved with themselves.

If this were so, in you would be destroyed
    Free will, nor any justice would there be
    In having joy for good, or grief for evil.

The heavens your movements do initiate,
    I say not all; but granting that I say it,
    Light has been given you for good and evil,

And free volition; which, if some fatigue
    In the first battles with the heavens it suffers,
    Afterwards conquers all, if well ’tis nurtured.

To greater force and to a better nature,
    Though free, ye subject are, and that creates
    The mind in you the heavens have not in charge.

Hence, if the present world doth go astray,
    In you the cause is, be it sought in you;
    And I therein will now be thy true spy.

Forth from the hand of Him, who fondles it
    Before it is, like to a little girl
    Weeping and laughing in her childish sport,

Issues the simple soul, that nothing knows,
    Save that, proceeding from a joyous Maker,
    Gladly it turns to that which gives it pleasure.

Of trivial good at first it tastes the savour;
    Is cheated by it, and runs after it,
    If guide or rein turn not aside its love.

Hence it behoved laws for a rein to place,
    Behoved a king to have, who at the least
    Of the true city should discern the tower.

The laws exist, but who sets hand to them?
    No one; because the shepherd who precedes
    Can ruminate, but cleaveth not the hoof;

Wherefore the people that perceives its guide
    Strike only at the good for which it hankers,
    Feeds upon that, and farther seeketh not.

Clearly canst thou perceive that evil guidance
    The cause is that has made the world depraved,
    And not that nature is corrupt in you.

Rome, that reformed the world, accustomed was
    Two suns to have, which one road and the other,
    Of God and of the world, made manifest.

One has the other quenched, and to the crosier
    The sword is joined, and ill beseemeth it
    That by main force one with the other go,

Because, being joined, one feareth not the other;
    If thou believe not, think upon the grain,
    For by its seed each herb is recognized.

In the land laved by Po and Adige,
    Valour and courtesy used to be found,
    Before that Frederick had his controversy;

Now in security can pass that way
    Whoever will abstain, through sense of shame,
    From speaking with the good, or drawing near them.

True, three old men are left, in whom upbraids
    The ancient age the new, and late they deem it
    That God restore them to the better life:

Currado da Palazzo, and good Gherardo,
    And Guido da Castel, who better named is,
    In fashion of the French, the simple Lombard:

Say thou henceforward that the Church of Rome,
    Confounding in itself two governments,
    Falls in the mire, and soils itself and burden.”

“O Marco mine,” I said, “thou reasonest well;
    And now discern I why the sons of Levi
    Have been excluded from the heritage.

But what Gherardo is it, who, as sample
    Of a lost race, thou sayest has remained
    In reprobation of the barbarous age?”

“Either thy speech deceives me, or it tempts me,”
    He answered me; “for speaking Tuscan to me,
    It seems of good Gherardo naught thou knowest.

By other surname do I know him not,
    Unless I take it from his daughter Gaia.
    May God be with you, for I come no farther.

Behold the dawn, that through the smoke rays out,
    Already whitening; and I must depart—
    Yonder the Angel is—ere he appear.”

Thus did he speak, and would no farther hear me.







Remember, Reader, if e’er in the Alps
    A mist o’ertook thee, through which thou couldst see
    Not otherwise than through its membrane mole,

How, when the vapours humid and condensed
    Begin to dissipate themselves, the sphere
    Of the sun feebly enters in among them,

And thy imagination will be swift
    In coming to perceive how I re-saw
    The sun at first, that was already setting.

Thus, to the faithful footsteps of my Master
    Mating mine own, I issued from that cloud
    To rays already dead on the low shores.

O thou, Imagination, that dost steal us
    So from without sometimes, that man perceives not,
    Although around may sound a thousand trumpets,

Who moveth thee, if sense impel thee not?
    Moves thee a light, which in the heaven takes form,
    By self, or by a will that downward guides it.

Of her impiety, who changed her form
    Into the bird that most delights in singing,
    In my imagining appeared the trace;

And hereupon my mind was so withdrawn
    Within itself, that from without there came
    Nothing that then might be received by it.

Then reigned within my lofty fantasy
    One crucified, disdainful and ferocious
    In countenance, and even thus was dying.

Around him were the great Ahasuerus,
    Esther his wife, and the just Mordecai,
    Who was in word and action so entire.

And even as this image burst asunder
    Of its own self, in fashion of a bubble
    In which the water it was made of fails,

There rose up in my vision a young maiden
    Bitterly weeping, and she said: “O queen,
    Why hast thou wished in anger to be naught?

Thou’st slain thyself, Lavinia not to lose;
    Now hast thou lost me; I am she who mourns,
    Mother, at thine ere at another’s ruin.”

As sleep is broken, when upon a sudden
    New light strikes in upon the eyelids closed,
    And broken quivers ere it dieth wholly,

So this imagining of mine fell down
    As soon as the effulgence smote my face,
    Greater by far than what is in our wont.

I turned me round to see where I might be,
    When said a voice, “Here is the passage up;”
    Which from all other purposes removed me,

And made my wish so full of eagerness
    To look and see who was it that was speaking,
    It never rests till meeting face to face;

But as before the sun, which quells the sight,
    And in its own excess its figure veils,
    Even so my power was insufficient here.

“This is a spirit divine, who in the way
    Of going up directs us without asking,
    And who with his own light himself conceals.

He does with us as man doth with himself;
    For he who sees the need, and waits the asking,
    Malignly leans already tow’rds denial.

Accord we now our feet to such inviting,
    Let us make haste to mount ere it grow dark;
    For then we could not till the day return.”

Thus my Conductor said; and I and he
    Together turned our footsteps to a stairway;
    And I, as soon as the first step I reached,

Near me perceived a motion as of wings,
    And fanning in the face, and saying, “‘Beati
    Pacifici,’ who are without ill anger.”

Already over us were so uplifted
    The latest sunbeams, which the night pursues,
    That upon many sides the stars appeared.

“O manhood mine, why dost thou vanish so?”
    I said within myself; for I perceived
    The vigour of my legs was put in truce.

We at the point were where no more ascends
    The stairway upward, and were motionless,
    Even as a ship, which at the shore arrives;

And I gave heed a little, if I might hear
    Aught whatsoever in the circle new;
    Then to my Master turned me round and said:

“Say, my sweet Father, what delinquency
    Is purged here in the circle where we are?
    Although our feet may pause, pause not thy speech.”

And he to me: “The love of good, remiss
    In what it should have done, is here restored;
    Here plied again the ill-belated oar;

But still more openly to understand,
    Turn unto me thy mind, and thou shalt gather
    Some profitable fruit from our delay.

Neither Creator nor a creature ever,
    Son,” he began, “was destitute of love
    Natural or spiritual; and thou knowest it.

The natural was ever without error;
    But err the other may by evil object,
    Or by too much, or by too little vigour.

While in the first it well directed is,
    And in the second moderates itself,
    It cannot be the cause of sinful pleasure;

But when to ill it turns, and, with more care
    Or lesser than it ought, runs after good,
    ’Gainst the Creator works his own creation.

Hence thou mayst comprehend that love must be
    The seed within yourselves of every virtue,
    And every act that merits punishment.

Now inasmuch as never from the welfare
    Of its own subject can love turn its sight,
    From their own hatred all things are secure;

And since we cannot think of any being
    Standing alone, nor from the First divided,
    Of hating Him is all desire cut off.

Hence if, discriminating, I judge well,
    The evil that one loves is of one’s neighbour,
    And this is born in three modes in your clay.

There are, who, by abasement of their neighbour,
    Hope to excel, and therefore only long
    That from his greatness he may be cast down;

There are, who power, grace, honour, and renown
    Fear they may lose because another rises,
    Thence are so sad that the reverse they love;

And there are those whom injury seems to chafe,
    So that it makes them greedy for revenge,
    And such must needs shape out another’s harm.

This threefold love is wept for down below;
    Now of the other will I have thee hear,
    That runneth after good with measure faulty.

Each one confusedly a good conceives
    Wherein the mind may rest, and longeth for it;
    Therefore to overtake it each one strives.

If languid love to look on this attract you,
    Or in attaining unto it, this cornice,
    After just penitence, torments you for it.

There’s other good that does not make man happy;
    ’Tis not felicity, ’tis not the good
    Essence, of every good the fruit and root.

The love that yields itself too much to this
    Above us is lamented in three circles;
    But how tripartite it may be described,

I say not, that thou seek it for thyself.”







An end had put unto his reasoning
    The lofty Teacher, and attent was looking
    Into my face, if I appeared content;

And I, whom a new thirst still goaded on,
    Without was mute, and said within: “Perchance
    The too much questioning I make annoys him.”

But that true Father, who had comprehended
    The timid wish, that opened not itself,
    By speaking gave me hardihood to speak.

Whence I: “My sight is, Master, vivified
    So in thy light, that clearly I discern
    Whate’er thy speech importeth or describes.

Therefore I thee entreat, sweet Father dear,
    To teach me love, to which thou dost refer
    Every good action and its contrary.”

“Direct,” he said, “towards me the keen eyes
    Of intellect, and clear will be to thee
    The error of the blind, who would be leaders.

The soul, which is created apt to love,
    Is mobile unto everything that pleases,
    Soon as by pleasure she is waked to action.

Your apprehension from some real thing
    An image draws, and in yourselves displays it
    So that it makes the soul turn unto it.

And if, when turned, towards it she incline,
    Love is that inclination; it is nature,
    Which is by pleasure bound in you anew

Then even as the fire doth upward move
    By its own form, which to ascend is born,
    Where longest in its matter it endures,

So comes the captive soul into desire,
    Which is a motion spiritual, and ne’er rests
    Until she doth enjoy the thing beloved.

Now may apparent be to thee how hidden
    The truth is from those people, who aver
    All love is in itself a laudable thing;

Because its matter may perchance appear
    Aye to be good; but yet not each impression
    Is good, albeit good may be the wax.”

“Thy words, and my sequacious intellect,”
    I answered him, “have love revealed to me;
    But that has made me more impregned with doubt;

For if love from without be offered us,
    And with another foot the soul go not,
    If right or wrong she go, ’tis not her merit.”

And he to me: “What reason seeth here,
    Myself can tell thee; beyond that await
    For Beatrice, since ’tis a work of faith.

Every substantial form, that segregate
    From matter is, and with it is united,
    Specific power has in itself collected,

Which without act is not perceptible,
    Nor shows itself except by its effect,
    As life does in a plant by the green leaves.

But still, whence cometh the intelligence
    Of the first notions, man is ignorant,
    And the affection for the first allurements,

Which are in you as instinct in the bee
    To make its honey; and this first desire
    Merit of praise or blame containeth not.

Now, that to this all others may be gathered,
    Innate within you is the power that counsels,
    And it should keep the threshold of assent.

This is the principle, from which is taken
    Occasion of desert in you, according
    As good and guilty loves it takes and winnows.

Those who, in reasoning, to the bottom went,
    Were of this innate liberty aware,
    Therefore bequeathed they Ethics to the world.

Supposing, then, that from necessity
    Springs every love that is within you kindled,
    Within yourselves the power is to restrain it.

The noble virtue Beatrice understands
    By the free will; and therefore see that thou
    Bear it in mind, if she should speak of it.”

The moon, belated almost unto midnight,
    Now made the stars appear to us more rare,
    Formed like a bucket, that is all ablaze,

And counter to the heavens ran through those paths
    Which the sun sets aflame, when he of Rome
    Sees it ’twixt Sardes and Corsicans go down;

And that patrician shade, for whom is named
    Pietola more than any Mantuan town,
    Had laid aside the burden of my lading;

Whence I, who reason manifest and plain
    In answer to my questions had received,
    Stood like a man in drowsy reverie.

But taken from me was this drowsiness
    Suddenly by a people, that behind
    Our backs already had come round to us.

And as, of old, Ismenus and Asopus
    Beside them saw at night the rush and throng,
    If but the Thebans were in need of Bacchus,

So they along that circle curve their step,
    From what I saw of those approaching us,
    Who by good-will and righteous love are ridden.

Full soon they were upon us, because running
    Moved onward all that mighty multitude,
    And two in the advance cried out, lamenting,

“Mary in haste unto the mountain ran,
    And Caesar, that he might subdue Ilerda,
    Thrust at Marseilles, and then ran into Spain.”

“Quick! quick! so that the time may not be lost
    By little love!” forthwith the others cried,
    “For ardour in well-doing freshens grace!”

“O folk, in whom an eager fervour now
    Supplies perhaps delay and negligence,
    Put by you in well-doing, through lukewarmness,

This one who lives, and truly I lie not,
    Would fain go up, if but the sun relight us;
    So tell us where the passage nearest is.”

These were the words of him who was my Guide;
    And some one of those spirits said: “Come on
    Behind us, and the opening shalt thou find;

So full of longing are we to move onward,
    That stay we cannot; therefore pardon us,
    If thou for churlishness our justice take.

I was San Zeno’s Abbot at Verona,
    Under the empire of good Barbarossa,
    Of whom still sorrowing Milan holds discourse;

And he has one foot in the grave already,
    Who shall erelong lament that monastery,
    And sorry be of having there had power,

Because his son, in his whole body sick,
    And worse in mind, and who was evil-born,
    He put into the place of its true pastor.”

If more he said, or silent was, I know not,
    He had already passed so far beyond us;
    But this I heard, and to retain it pleased me.

And he who was in every need my succour
    Said: “Turn thee hitherward; see two of them
    Come fastening upon slothfulness their teeth.”

In rear of all they shouted: “Sooner were
    The people dead to whom the sea was opened,
    Than their inheritors the Jordan saw;

And those who the fatigue did not endure
    Unto the issue, with Anchises’ son,
    Themselves to life withouten glory offered.”

Then when from us so separated were
    Those shades, that they no longer could be seen,
    Within me a new thought did entrance find,

Whence others many and diverse were born;
    And so I lapsed from one into another,
    That in a reverie mine eyes I closed,

And meditation into dream transmuted.







It was the hour when the diurnal heat
    No more can warm the coldness of the moon,
    Vanquished by earth, or peradventure Saturn,

When geomancers their Fortuna Major
    See in the orient before the dawn
    Rise by a path that long remains not dim,

There came to me in dreams a stammering woman,
    Squint in her eyes, and in her feet distorted,
    With hands dissevered and of sallow hue.

I looked at her; and as the sun restores
    The frigid members which the night benumbs,
    Even thus my gaze did render voluble

Her tongue, and made her all erect thereafter
    In little while, and the lost countenance
    As love desires it so in her did colour.

When in this wise she had her speech unloosed,
    She ’gan to sing so, that with difficulty
    Could I have turned my thoughts away from her.

“I am,” she sang, “I am the Siren sweet
    Who mariners amid the main unman,
    So full am I of pleasantness to hear.

I drew Ulysses from his wandering way
    Unto my song, and he who dwells with me
    Seldom departs so wholly I content him.”

Her mouth was not yet closed again, before
    Appeared a Lady saintly and alert
    Close at my side to put her to confusion.

“Virgilius, O Virgilius! who is this?”
    Sternly she said; and he was drawing near
    With eyes still fixed upon that modest one.

She seized the other and in front laid open,
    Rending her garments, and her belly showed me;
    This waked me with the stench that issued from it.

I turned mine eyes, and good Virgilius said:
    “At least thrice have I called thee; rise and come;
    Find we the opening by which thou mayst enter.”

I rose; and full already of high day
    Were all the circles of the Sacred Mountain,
    And with the new sun at our back we went.

Following behind him, I my forehead bore
    Like unto one who has it laden with thought,
    Who makes himself the half arch of a bridge,

When I heard say, “Come, here the passage is,”
    Spoken in a manner gentle and benign,
    Such as we hear not in this mortal region.

With open wings, which of a swan appeared,
    Upward he turned us who thus spake to us,
    Between the two walls of the solid granite.

He moved his pinions afterwards and fanned us,
    Affirming those ‘qui lugent’ to be blessed,
    For they shall have their souls with comfort filled.

“What aileth thee, that aye to earth thou gazest?”
    To me my Guide began to say, we both
    Somewhat beyond the Angel having mounted.

And I: “With such misgiving makes me go
    A vision new, which bends me to itself,
    So that I cannot from the thought withdraw me.”

“Didst thou behold,” he said, “that old enchantress,
    Who sole above us henceforth is lamented?
    Didst thou behold how man is freed from her?

Suffice it thee, and smite earth with thy heels,
    Thine eyes lift upward to the lure, that whirls
    The Eternal King with revolutions vast.”

Even as the hawk, that first his feet surveys,
    Then turns him to the call and stretches forward,
    Through the desire of food that draws him thither,

Such I became, and such, as far as cleaves
    The rock to give a way to him who mounts,
    Went on to where the circling doth begin.

On the fifth circle when I had come forth,
    People I saw upon it who were weeping,
    Stretched prone upon the ground, all downward turned.

“Adhaesit pavimento anima mea,”
    I heard them say with sighings so profound,
    That hardly could the words be understood.

“O ye elect of God, whose sufferings
    Justice and Hope both render less severe,
    Direct ye us towards the high ascents.”

“If ye are come secure from this prostration,
    And wish to find the way most speedily,
    Let your right hands be evermore outside.”

Thus did the Poet ask, and thus was answered
    By them somewhat in front of us; whence I
    In what was spoken divined the rest concealed,

And unto my Lord’s eyes mine eyes I turned;
    Whence he assented with a cheerful sign
    To what the sight of my desire implored.

When of myself I could dispose at will,
    Above that creature did I draw myself,
    Whose words before had caused me to take note,

Saying: “O Spirit, in whom weeping ripens
    That without which to God we cannot turn,
    Suspend awhile for me thy greater care.

Who wast thou, and why are your backs turned upwards,
    Tell me, and if thou wouldst that I procure thee
    Anything there whence living I departed.”

And he to me: “Wherefore our backs the heaven
    Turns to itself, know shalt thou; but beforehand
    ‘Scias quod ego fui successor Petri.’

Between Siestri and Chiaveri descends
    A river beautiful, and of its name
    The title of my blood its summit makes.

A month and little more essayed I how
    Weighs the great cloak on him from mire who keeps it,
    For all the other burdens seem a feather.

Tardy, ah woe is me! was my conversion;
    But when the Roman Shepherd I was made,
    Then I discovered life to be a lie.

I saw that there the heart was not at rest,
    Nor farther in that life could one ascend;
    Whereby the love of this was kindled in me.

Until that time a wretched soul and parted
    From God was I, and wholly avaricious;
    Now, as thou seest, I here am punished for it.

What avarice does is here made manifest
    In the purgation of these souls converted,
    And no more bitter pain the Mountain has.

Even as our eye did not uplift itself
    Aloft, being fastened upon earthly things,
    So justice here has merged it in the earth.

As avarice had extinguished our affection
    For every good, whereby was action lost,
    So justice here doth hold us in restraint,

Bound and imprisoned by the feet and hands;
    And so long as it pleases the just Lord
    Shall we remain immovable and prostrate.”

I on my knees had fallen, and wished to speak;
    But even as I began, and he was ’ware,
    Only by listening, of my reverence,

“What cause,” he said, “has downward bent thee thus?”
    And I to him: “For your own dignity,
    Standing, my conscience stung me with remorse.”

“Straighten thy legs, and upward raise thee, brother,”
    He answered: “Err not, fellow-servant am I
    With thee and with the others to one power.

If e’er that holy, evangelic sound,
    Which sayeth ‘neque nubent,’ thou hast heard,
    Well canst thou see why in this wise I speak.

Now go; no longer will I have thee linger,
    Because thy stay doth incommode my weeping,
    With which I ripen that which thou hast said.

On earth I have a grandchild named Alagia,
    Good in herself, unless indeed our house
    Malevolent may make her by example,

And she alone remains to me on earth.”







Ill strives the will against a better will;
    Therefore, to pleasure him, against my pleasure
    I drew the sponge not saturate from the water.

Onward I moved, and onward moved my Leader,
    Through vacant places, skirting still the rock,
    As on a wall close to the battlements;

For they that through their eyes pour drop by drop
    The malady which all the world pervades,
    On the other side too near the verge approach.

Accursed mayst thou be, thou old she-wolf,
    That more than all the other beasts hast prey,
    Because of hunger infinitely hollow!

O heaven, in whose gyrations some appear
    To think conditions here below are changed,
    When will he come through whom she shall depart?

Onward we went with footsteps slow and scarce,
    And I attentive to the shades I heard
    Piteously weeping and bemoaning them;

And I by peradventure heard “Sweet Mary!”
    Uttered in front of us amid the weeping
    Even as a woman does who is in child-birth;

And in continuance: “How poor thou wast
    Is manifested by that hostelry
    Where thou didst lay thy sacred burden down.”

Thereafterward I heard: “O good Fabricius,
    Virtue with poverty didst thou prefer
    To the possession of great wealth with vice.”

So pleasurable were these words to me
    That I drew farther onward to have knowledge
    Touching that spirit whence they seemed to come.

He furthermore was speaking of the largess
    Which Nicholas unto the maidens gave,
    In order to conduct their youth to honour.

“O soul that dost so excellently speak,
    Tell me who wast thou,” said I, “and why only
    Thou dost renew these praises well deserved?

Not without recompense shall be thy word,
    If I return to finish the short journey
    Of that life which is flying to its end.”

And he: “I’ll tell thee, not for any comfort
    I may expect from earth, but that so much
    Grace shines in thee or ever thou art dead.

I was the root of that malignant plant
    Which overshadows all the Christian world,
    So that good fruit is seldom gathered from it;

But if Douay and Ghent, and Lille and Bruges
    Had Power, soon vengeance would be taken on it;
    And this I pray of Him who judges all.

Hugh Capet was I called upon the earth;
    From me were born the Louises and Philips,
    By whom in later days has France been governed.

I was the son of a Parisian butcher,
    What time the ancient kings had perished all,
    Excepting one, contrite in cloth of gray.

I found me grasping in my hands the rein
    Of the realm’s government, and so great power
    Of new acquest, and so with friends abounding,

That to the widowed diadem promoted
    The head of mine own offspring was, from whom
    The consecrated bones of these began.

So long as the great dowry of Provence
    Out of my blood took not the sense of shame,
    ’Twas little worth, but still it did no harm.

Then it began with falsehood and with force
    Its rapine; and thereafter, for amends,
    Took Ponthieu, Normandy, and Gascony.

Charles came to Italy, and for amends
    A victim made of Conradin, and then
    Thrust Thomas back to heaven, for amends.

A time I see, not very distant now,
    Which draweth forth another Charles from France,
    The better to make known both him and his.

Unarmed he goes, and only with the lance
    That Judas jousted with; and that he thrusts
    So that he makes the paunch of Florence burst.

He thence not land, but sin and infamy,
    Shall gain, so much more grievous to himself
    As the more light such damage he accounts.

The other, now gone forth, ta’en in his ship,
    See I his daughter sell, and chaffer for her
    As corsairs do with other female slaves.

What more, O Avarice, canst thou do to us,
    Since thou my blood so to thyself hast drawn,
    It careth not for its own proper flesh?

That less may seem the future ill and past,
    I see the flower-de-luce Alagna enter,
    And Christ in his own Vicar captive made.

I see him yet another time derided;
    I see renewed the vinegar and gall,
    And between living thieves I see him slain.

I see the modern Pilate so relentless,
    This does not sate him, but without decretal
    He to the temple bears his sordid sails!

When, O my Lord! shall I be joyful made
    By looking on the vengeance which, concealed,
    Makes sweet thine anger in thy secrecy?

What I was saying of that only bride
    Of the Holy Ghost, and which occasioned thee
    To turn towards me for some commentary,

So long has been ordained to all our prayers
    As the day lasts; but when the night comes on,
    Contrary sound we take instead thereof.

At that time we repeat Pygmalion,
    Of whom a traitor, thief, and parricide
    Made his insatiable desire of gold;

And the misery of avaricious Midas,
    That followed his inordinate demand,
    At which forevermore one needs but laugh.

The foolish Achan each one then records,
    And how he stole the spoils; so that the wrath
    Of Joshua still appears to sting him here.

Then we accuse Sapphira with her husband,
    We laud the hoof-beats Heliodorus had,
    And the whole mount in infamy encircles

Polymnestor who murdered Polydorus.
    Here finally is cried: ‘O Crassus, tell us,
    For thou dost know, what is the taste of gold?’

Sometimes we speak, one loud, another low,
    According to desire of speech, that spurs us
    To greater now and now to lesser pace.

But in the good that here by day is talked of,
    Erewhile alone I was not; yet near by
    No other person lifted up his voice.”

From him already we departed were,
    And made endeavour to o’ercome the road
    As much as was permitted to our power,

When I perceived, like something that is falling,
    The mountain tremble, whence a chill seized on me,
    As seizes him who to his death is going.

Certes so violently shook not Delos,
    Before Latona made her nest therein
    To give birth to the two eyes of the heaven.

Then upon all sides there began a cry,
    Such that the Master drew himself towards me,
    Saying, “Fear not, while I am guiding thee.”

“Gloria in excelsis Deo,” all
    Were saying, from what near I comprehended,
    Where it was possible to hear the cry.

We paused immovable and in suspense,
    Even as the shepherds who first heard that song,
    Until the trembling ceased, and it was finished.

Then we resumed again our holy path,
    Watching the shades that lay upon the ground,
    Already turned to their accustomed plaint.

No ignorance ever with so great a strife
    Had rendered me importunate to know,
    If erreth not in this my memory,

As meditating then I seemed to have;
    Nor out of haste to question did I dare,
    Nor of myself I there could aught perceive;

So I went onward timorous and thoughtful.







The natural thirst, that ne’er is satisfied
    Excepting with the water for whose grace
    The woman of Samaria besought,

Put me in travail, and haste goaded me
    Along the encumbered path behind my Leader
    And I was pitying that righteous vengeance;

And lo! in the same manner as Luke writeth
    That Christ appeared to two upon the way
    From the sepulchral cave already risen,

A shade appeared to us, and came behind us,
    Down gazing on the prostrate multitude,
    Nor were we ware of it, until it spake,

Saying, “My brothers, may God give you peace!”
    We turned us suddenly, and Virgilius rendered
    To him the countersign thereto conforming.

Thereon began he: “In the blessed council,
    Thee may the court veracious place in peace,
    That me doth banish in eternal exile!”

“How,” said he, and the while we went with speed,
    “If ye are shades whom God deigns not on high,
    Who up his stairs so far has guided you?”

And said my Teacher: “If thou note the marks
    Which this one bears, and which the Angel traces
    Well shalt thou see he with the good must reign.

But because she who spinneth day and night
    For him had not yet drawn the distaff off,
    Which Clotho lays for each one and compacts,

His soul, which is thy sister and my own,
    In coming upwards could not come alone,
    By reason that it sees not in our fashion.

Whence I was drawn from out the ample throat
    Of Hell to be his guide, and I shall guide him
    As far on as my school has power to lead.

But tell us, if thou knowest, why such a shudder
    Erewhile the mountain gave, and why together
    All seemed to cry, as far as its moist feet?”

In asking he so hit the very eye
    Of my desire, that merely with the hope
    My thirst became the less unsatisfied.

“Naught is there,” he began, “that without order
    May the religion of the mountain feel,
    Nor aught that may be foreign to its custom.

Free is it here from every permutation;
    What from itself heaven in itself receiveth
    Can be of this the cause, and naught beside;

Because that neither rain, nor hail, nor snow,
    Nor dew, nor hoar-frost any higher falls
    Than the short, little stairway of three steps.

Dense clouds do not appear, nor rarefied,
    Nor coruscation, nor the daughter of Thaumas,
    That often upon earth her region shifts;

No arid vapour any farther rises
    Than to the top of the three steps I spake of,
    Whereon the Vicar of Peter has his feet.

Lower down perchance it trembles less or more,
    But, for the wind that in the earth is hidden
    I know not how, up here it never trembled.

It trembles here, whenever any soul
    Feels itself pure, so that it soars, or moves
    To mount aloft, and such a cry attends it.

Of purity the will alone gives proof,
    Which, being wholly free to change its convent,
    Takes by surprise the soul, and helps it fly.

First it wills well; but the desire permits not,
    Which divine justice with the self-same will
    There was to sin, upon the torment sets.

And I, who have been lying in this pain
    Five hundred years and more, but just now felt
    A free volition for a better seat.

Therefore thou heardst the earthquake, and the pious
    Spirits along the mountain rendering praise
    Unto the Lord, that soon he speed them upwards.”

So said he to him; and since we enjoy
    As much in drinking as the thirst is great,
    I could not say how much it did me good.

And the wise Leader: “Now I see the net
    That snares you here, and how ye are set free,
    Why the earth quakes, and wherefore ye rejoice.

Now who thou wast be pleased that I may know;
    And why so many centuries thou hast here
    Been lying, let me gather from thy words.”

“In days when the good Titus, with the aid
    Of the supremest King, avenged the wounds
    Whence issued forth the blood by Judas sold,

Under the name that most endures and honours,
    Was I on earth,” that spirit made reply,
    “Greatly renowned, but not with faith as yet.

My vocal spirit was so sweet, that Rome
    Me, a Thoulousian, drew unto herself,
    Where I deserved to deck my brows with myrtle.

Statius the people name me still on earth;
    I sang of Thebes, and then of great Achilles;
    But on the way fell with my second burden.

The seeds unto my ardour were the sparks
    Of that celestial flame which heated me,
    Whereby more than a thousand have been fired;

Of the Aeneid speak I, which to me
    A mother was, and was my nurse in song;
    Without this weighed I not a drachma’s weight.

And to have lived upon the earth what time
    Virgilius lived, I would accept one sun
    More than I must ere issuing from my ban.”

These words towards me made Virgilius turn
    With looks that in their silence said, “Be silent!”
    But yet the power that wills cannot do all things;

For tears and laughter are such pursuivants
    Unto the passion from which each springs forth,
    In the most truthful least the will they follow.

I only smiled, as one who gives the wink;
    Whereat the shade was silent, and it gazed
    Into mine eyes, where most expression dwells;

And, “As thou well mayst consummate a labour
    So great,” it said, “why did thy face just now
    Display to me the lightning of a smile?”

Now am I caught on this side and on that;
    One keeps me silent, one to speak conjures me,
    Wherefore I sigh, and I am understood.

“Speak,” said my Master, “and be not afraid
    Of speaking, but speak out, and say to him
    What he demands with such solicitude.”

Whence I: “Thou peradventure marvellest,
    O antique spirit, at the smile I gave;
    But I will have more wonder seize upon thee.

This one, who guides on high these eyes of mine,
    Is that Virgilius, from whom thou didst learn
    To sing aloud of men and of the Gods.

If other cause thou to my smile imputedst,
    Abandon it as false, and trust it was
    Those words which thou hast spoken concerning him.”

Already he was stooping to embrace
    My Teacher’s feet; but he said to him: “Brother,
    Do not; for shade thou art, and shade beholdest.”

And he uprising: “Now canst thou the sum
    Of love which warms me to thee comprehend,
    When this our vanity I disremember,

Treating a shadow as substantial thing.”







Already was the Angel left behind us,
    The Angel who to the sixth round had turned us,
    Having erased one mark from off my face;

And those who have in justice their desire
    Had said to us, “Beati,” in their voices,
    With “sitio,” and without more ended it.

And I, more light than through the other passes,
    Went onward so, that without any labour
    I followed upward the swift-footed spirits;

When thus Virgilius began: “The love
    Kindled by virtue aye another kindles,
    Provided outwardly its flame appear.

Hence from the hour that Juvenal descended
    Among us into the infernal Limbo,
    Who made apparent to me thy affection,

My kindliness towards thee was as great
    As ever bound one to an unseen person,
    So that these stairs will now seem short to me.

But tell me, and forgive me as a friend,
    If too great confidence let loose the rein,
    And as a friend now hold discourse with me;

How was it possible within thy breast
    For avarice to find place, ’mid so much wisdom
    As thou wast filled with by thy diligence?”

These words excited Statius at first
    Somewhat to laughter; afterward he answered:
    “Each word of thine is love’s dear sign to me.

Verily oftentimes do things appear
    Which give fallacious matter to our doubts,
    Instead of the true causes which are hidden!

Thy question shows me thy belief to be
    That I was niggard in the other life,
    It may be from the circle where I was;

Therefore know thou, that avarice was removed
    Too far from me; and this extravagance
    Thousands of lunar periods have punished.

And were it not that I my thoughts uplifted,
    When I the passage heard where thou exclaimest,
    As if indignant, unto human nature,

‘To what impellest thou not, O cursed hunger
    Of gold, the appetite of mortal men?’
    Revolving I should feel the dismal joustings.

Then I perceived the hands could spread too wide
    Their wings in spending, and repented me
    As well of that as of my other sins;

How many with shorn hair shall rise again
    Because of ignorance, which from this sin
    Cuts off repentance living and in death!

And know that the transgression which rebuts
    By direct opposition any sin
    Together with it here its verdure dries.

Therefore if I have been among that folk
    Which mourns its avarice, to purify me,
    For its opposite has this befallen me.”

“Now when thou sangest the relentless weapons
    Of the twofold affliction of Jocasta,”
    The singer of the Songs Bucolic said,

“From that which Clio there with thee preludes,
    It does not seem that yet had made thee faithful
    That faith without which no good works suffice.

If this be so, what candles or what sun
    Scattered thy darkness so that thou didst trim
    Thy sails behind the Fisherman thereafter?”

And he to him: “Thou first directedst me
    Towards Parnassus, in its grots to drink,
    And first concerning God didst me enlighten.

Thou didst as he who walketh in the night,
    Who bears his light behind, which helps him not,
    But wary makes the persons after him,

When thou didst say: ‘The age renews itself,
    Justice returns, and man’s primeval time,
    And a new progeny descends from heaven.’

Through thee I Poet was, through thee a Christian;
    But that thou better see what I design,
    To colour it will I extend my hand.

Already was the world in every part
    Pregnant with the true creed, disseminated
    By messengers of the eternal kingdom;

And thy assertion, spoken of above,
    With the new preachers was in unison;
    Whence I to visit them the custom took.

Then they became so holy in my sight,
    That, when Domitian persecuted them,
    Not without tears of mine were their laments;

And all the while that I on earth remained,
    Them I befriended, and their upright customs
    Made me disparage all the other sects.

And ere I led the Greeks unto the rivers
    Of Thebes, in poetry, I was baptized,
    But out of fear was covertly a Christian,

For a long time professing paganism;
    And this lukewarmness caused me the fourth circle
    To circuit round more than four centuries.

Thou, therefore, who hast raised the covering
    That hid from me whatever good I speak of,
    While in ascending we have time to spare,

Tell me, in what place is our friend Terentius,
    Caecilius, Plautus, Varro, if thou knowest;
    Tell me if they are damned, and in what alley.”

“These, Persius and myself, and others many,”
    Replied my Leader, “with that Grecian are
    Whom more than all the rest the Muses suckled,

In the first circle of the prison blind;
    Ofttimes we of the mountain hold discourse
    Which has our nurses ever with itself.

Euripides is with us, Antiphon,
    Simonides, Agatho, and many other
    Greeks who of old their brows with laurel decked.

There some of thine own people may be seen,
    Antigone, Deiphile and Argia,
    And there Ismene mournful as of old.

There she is seen who pointed out Langia;
    There is Tiresias’ daughter, and there Thetis,
    And there Deidamia with her sisters.”

Silent already were the poets both,
    Attent once more in looking round about,
    From the ascent and from the walls released;

And four handmaidens of the day already
    Were left behind, and at the pole the fifth
    Was pointing upward still its burning horn,

What time my Guide: “I think that tow’rds the edge
    Our dexter shoulders it behoves us turn,
    Circling the mount as we are wont to do.”

Thus in that region custom was our ensign;
    And we resumed our way with less suspicion
    For the assenting of that worthy soul

They in advance went on, and I alone
    Behind them, and I listened to their speech,
    Which gave me lessons in the art of song.

But soon their sweet discourses interrupted
    A tree which midway in the road we found,
    With apples sweet and grateful to the smell.

And even as a fir-tree tapers upward
    From bough to bough, so downwardly did that;
    I think in order that no one might climb it.

On that side where our pathway was enclosed
    Fell from the lofty rock a limpid water,
    And spread itself abroad upon the leaves.

The Poets twain unto the tree drew near,
    And from among the foliage a voice
    Cried: “Of this food ye shall have scarcity.”

Then said: “More thoughtful Mary was of making
    The marriage feast complete and honourable,
    Than of her mouth which now for you responds;

And for their drink the ancient Roman women
    With water were content; and Daniel
    Disparaged food, and understanding won.

The primal age was beautiful as gold;
    Acorns it made with hunger savorous,
    And nectar every rivulet with thirst.

Honey and locusts were the aliments
    That fed the Baptist in the wilderness;
    Whence he is glorious, and so magnified

As by the Evangel is revealed to you.”







The while among the verdant leaves mine eyes
    I riveted, as he is wont to do
    Who wastes his life pursuing little birds,

My more than Father said unto me: “Son,
    Come now; because the time that is ordained us
    More usefully should be apportioned out.”

I turned my face and no less soon my steps
    Unto the Sages, who were speaking so
    They made the going of no cost to me;

And lo! were heard a song and a lament,
    “Labia mea, Domine,” in fashion
    Such that delight and dolence it brought forth.

“O my sweet Father, what is this I hear?”
    Began I; and he answered: “Shades that go
    Perhaps the knot unloosing of their debt.”

In the same way that thoughtful pilgrims do,
    Who, unknown people on the road o’ertaking,
    Turn themselves round to them, and do not stop,

Even thus, behind us with a swifter motion
    Coming and passing onward, gazed upon us
    A crowd of spirits silent and devout.

Each in his eyes was dark and cavernous,
    Pallid in face, and so emaciate
    That from the bones the skin did shape itself.

I do not think that so to merest rind
    Could Erisichthon have been withered up
    By famine, when most fear he had of it.

Thinking within myself I said: “Behold,
    This is the folk who lost Jerusalem,
    When Mary made a prey of her own son.”

Their sockets were like rings without the gems;
    Whoever in the face of men reads ‘omo’
    Might well in these have recognised the ‘m.’

Who would believe the odour of an apple,
    Begetting longing, could consume them so,
    And that of water, without knowing how?

I still was wondering what so famished them,
    For the occasion not yet manifest
    Of their emaciation and sad squalor;

And lo! from out the hollow of his head
    His eyes a shade turned on me, and looked keenly;
    Then cried aloud: “What grace to me is this?”

Never should I have known him by his look;
    But in his voice was evident to me
    That which his aspect had suppressed within it.

This spark within me wholly re-enkindled
    My recognition of his altered face,
    And I recalled the features of Forese.

“Ah, do not look at this dry leprosy,”
    Entreated he, “which doth my skin discolour,
    Nor at default of flesh that I may have;

But tell me truth of thee, and who are those
    Two souls, that yonder make for thee an escort;
    Do not delay in speaking unto me.”

“That face of thine, which dead I once bewept,
    Gives me for weeping now no lesser grief,”
    I answered him, “beholding it so changed!

But tell me, for God’s sake, what thus denudes you?
    Make me not speak while I am marvelling,
    For ill speaks he who’s full of other longings.”

And he to me: “From the eternal council
    Falls power into the water and the tree
    Behind us left, whereby I grow so thin.

All of this people who lamenting sing,
    For following beyond measure appetite
    In hunger and thirst are here re-sanctified.

Desire to eat and drink enkindles in us
    The scent that issues from the apple-tree,
    And from the spray that sprinkles o’er the verdure;

And not a single time alone, this ground
    Encompassing, is refreshed our pain,—
    I say our pain, and ought to say our solace,—

For the same wish doth lead us to the tree
    Which led the Christ rejoicing to say ‘Eli,’
    When with his veins he liberated us.”

And I to him: “Forese, from that day
    When for a better life thou changedst worlds,
    Up to this time five years have not rolled round.

If sooner were the power exhausted in thee
    Of sinning more, than thee the hour surprised
    Of that good sorrow which to God reweds us,

How hast thou come up hitherward already?
    I thought to find thee down there underneath,
    Where time for time doth restitution make.”

And he to me: “Thus speedily has led me
    To drink of the sweet wormwood of these torments,
    My Nella with her overflowing tears;

She with her prayers devout and with her sighs
    Has drawn me from the coast where one where one awaits,
    And from the other circles set me free.

So much more dear and pleasing is to God
    My little widow, whom so much I loved,
    As in good works she is the more alone;

For the Barbagia of Sardinia
    By far more modest in its women is
    Than the Barbagia I have left her in.

O brother sweet, what wilt thou have me say?
    A future time is in my sight already,
    To which this hour will not be very old,

When from the pulpit shall be interdicted
    To the unblushing womankind of Florence
    To go about displaying breast and paps.

What savages were e’er, what Saracens,
    Who stood in need, to make them covered go,
    Of spiritual or other discipline?

But if the shameless women were assured
    Of what swift Heaven prepares for them, already
    Wide open would they have their mouths to howl;

For if my foresight here deceive me not,
    They shall be sad ere he has bearded cheeks
    Who now is hushed to sleep with lullaby.

O brother, now no longer hide thee from me;
    See that not only I, but all these people
    Are gazing there, where thou dost veil the sun.”

Whence I to him: “If thou bring back to mind
    What thou with me hast been and I with thee,
    The present memory will be grievous still.

Out of that life he turned me back who goes
    In front of me, two days agone when round
    The sister of him yonder showed herself,”

And to the sun I pointed.  “Through the deep
    Night of the truly dead has this one led me,
    With this true flesh, that follows after him.

Thence his encouragements have led me up,
    Ascending and still circling round the mount
    That you doth straighten, whom the world made crooked.

He says that he will bear me company,
    Till I shall be where Beatrice will be;
    There it behoves me to remain without him.

This is Virgilius, who thus says to me,”
    And him I pointed at; “the other is
    That shade for whom just now shook every slope

Your realm, that from itself discharges him.”







Nor speech the going, nor the going that
    Slackened; but talking we went bravely on,
    Even as a vessel urged by a good wind.

And shadows, that appeared things doubly dead,
    From out the sepulchres of their eyes betrayed
    Wonder at me, aware that I was living.

And I, continuing my colloquy,
    Said: “Peradventure he goes up more slowly
    Than he would do, for other people’s sake.

But tell me, if thou knowest, where is Piccarda;
    Tell me if any one of note I see
    Among this folk that gazes at me so.”

“My sister, who, ’twixt beautiful and good,
    I know not which was more, triumphs rejoicing
    Already in her crown on high Olympus.”

So said he first, and then: “’Tis not forbidden
    To name each other here, so milked away
    Is our resemblance by our dieting.

This,” pointing with his finger, “is Buonagiunta,
    Buonagiunta, of Lucca; and that face
    Beyond him there, more peaked than the others,

Has held the holy Church within his arms;
    From Tours was he, and purges by his fasting
    Bolsena’s eels and the Vernaccia wine.”

He named me many others one by one;
    And all contented seemed at being named,
    So that for this I saw not one dark look.

I saw for hunger bite the empty air
    Ubaldin dalla Pila, and Boniface,
    Who with his crook had pastured many people.

I saw Messer Marchese, who had leisure
    Once at Forli for drinking with less dryness,
    And he was one who ne’er felt satisfied.

But as he does who scans, and then doth prize
    One more than others, did I him of Lucca,
    Who seemed to take most cognizance of me.

He murmured, and I know not what Gentucca
    From that place heard I, where he felt the wound
    Of justice, that doth macerate them so.

“O soul,” I said, “that seemest so desirous
    To speak with me, do so that I may hear thee,
    And with thy speech appease thyself and me.”

“A maid is born, and wears not yet the veil,”
    Began he, “who to thee shall pleasant make
    My city, howsoever men may blame it.

Thou shalt go on thy way with this prevision;
    If by my murmuring thou hast been deceived,
    True things hereafter will declare it to thee.

But say if him I here behold, who forth
    Evoked the new-invented rhymes, beginning,
    ‘Ladies, that have intelligence of love?’”

And I to him: “One am I, who, whenever
    Love doth inspire me, note, and in that measure
    Which he within me dictates, singing go.”

“O brother, now I see,” he said, “the knot
    Which me, the Notary, and Guittone held
    Short of the sweet new style that now I hear.

I do perceive full clearly how your pens
    Go closely following after him who dictates,
    Which with our own forsooth came not to pass;

And he who sets himself to go beyond,
    No difference sees from one style to another;”
    And as if satisfied, he held his peace.

Even as the birds, that winter tow’rds the Nile,
    Sometimes into a phalanx form themselves,
    Then fly in greater haste, and go in file;

In such wise all the people who were there,
    Turning their faces, hurried on their steps,
    Both by their leanness and their wishes light.

And as a man, who weary is with trotting,
    Lets his companions onward go, and walks,
    Until he vents the panting of his chest;

So did Forese let the holy flock
    Pass by, and came with me behind it, saying,
    “When will it be that I again shall see thee?”

“How long,” I answered, “I may live, I know not;
    Yet my return will not so speedy be,
    But I shall sooner in desire arrive;

Because the place where I was set to live
    From day to day of good is more depleted,
    And unto dismal ruin seems ordained.”

“Now go,” he said, “for him most guilty of it
    At a beast’s tail behold I dragged along
    Towards the valley where is no repentance.

Faster at every step the beast is going,
    Increasing evermore until it smites him,
    And leaves the body vilely mutilated.

Not long those wheels shall turn,” and he uplifted
    His eyes to heaven, “ere shall be clear to thee
    That which my speech no farther can declare.

Now stay behind; because the time so precious
    Is in this kingdom, that I lose too much
    By coming onward thus abreast with thee.”

As sometimes issues forth upon a gallop
    A cavalier from out a troop that ride,
    And seeks the honour of the first encounter,

So he with greater strides departed from us;
    And on the road remained I with those two,
    Who were such mighty marshals of the world.

And when before us he had gone so far
    Mine eyes became to him such pursuivants
    As was my understanding to his words,

Appeared to me with laden and living boughs
    Another apple-tree, and not far distant,
    From having but just then turned thitherward.

People I saw beneath it lift their hands,
    And cry I know not what towards the leaves,
    Like little children eager and deluded,

Who pray, and he they pray to doth not answer,
    But, to make very keen their appetite,
    Holds their desire aloft, and hides it not.

Then they departed as if undeceived;
    And now we came unto the mighty tree
    Which prayers and tears so manifold refuses.

“Pass farther onward without drawing near;
    The tree of which Eve ate is higher up,
    And out of that one has this tree been raised.”

Thus said I know not who among the branches;
    Whereat Virgilius, Statius, and myself
    Went crowding forward on the side that rises.

“Be mindful,” said he, “of the accursed ones
    Formed of the cloud-rack, who inebriate
    Combated Theseus with their double breasts;

And of the Jews who showed them soft in drinking,
    Whence Gideon would not have them for companions
    When he tow’rds Midian the hills descended.”

Thus, closely pressed to one of the two borders,
    On passed we, hearing sins of gluttony,
    Followed forsooth by miserable gains;

Then set at large upon the lonely road,
    A thousand steps and more we onward went,
    In contemplation, each without a word.

“What go ye thinking thus, ye three alone?”
    Said suddenly a voice, whereat I started
    As terrified and timid beasts are wont.

I raised my head to see who this might be,
    And never in a furnace was there seen
    Metals or glass so lucent and so red

As one I saw who said: “If it may please you
    To mount aloft, here it behoves you turn;
    This way goes he who goeth after peace.”

His aspect had bereft me of my sight,
    So that I turned me back unto my Teachers,
    Like one who goeth as his hearing guides him.

And as, the harbinger of early dawn,
    The air of May doth move and breathe out fragrance,
    Impregnate all with herbage and with flowers,

So did I feel a breeze strike in the midst
    My front, and felt the moving of the plumes
    That breathed around an odour of ambrosia;

And heard it said: “Blessed are they whom grace
    So much illumines, that the love of taste
    Excites not in their breasts too great desire,

Hungering at all times so far as is just.”







Now was it the ascent no hindrance brooked,
    Because the sun had his meridian circle
    To Taurus left, and night to Scorpio;

Wherefore as doth a man who tarries not,
    But goes his way, whate’er to him appear,
    If of necessity the sting transfix him,

In this wise did we enter through the gap,
    Taking the stairway, one before the other,
    Which by its narrowness divides the climbers.

And as the little stork that lifts its wing
    With a desire to fly, and does not venture
    To leave the nest, and lets it downward droop,

Even such was I, with the desire of asking
    Kindled and quenched, unto the motion coming
    He makes who doth address himself to speak.

Not for our pace, though rapid it might be,
    My father sweet forbore, but said: “Let fly
    The bow of speech thou to the barb hast drawn.”

With confidence I opened then my mouth,
    And I began: “How can one meagre grow
    There where the need of nutriment applies not?”

“If thou wouldst call to mind how Meleager
    Was wasted by the wasting of a brand,
    This would not,” said he, “be to thee so sour;

And wouldst thou think how at each tremulous motion
    Trembles within a mirror your own image;
    That which seems hard would mellow seem to thee.

But that thou mayst content thee in thy wish
    Lo Statius here; and him I call and pray
    He now will be the healer of thy wounds.”

“If I unfold to him the eternal vengeance,”
    Responded Statius, “where thou present art,
    Be my excuse that I can naught deny thee.”

Then he began: “Son, if these words of mine
    Thy mind doth contemplate and doth receive,
    They’ll be thy light unto the How thou sayest.

The perfect blood, which never is drunk up
    Into the thirsty veins, and which remaineth
    Like food that from the table thou removest,

Takes in the heart for all the human members
    Virtue informative, as being that
    Which to be changed to them goes through the veins

Again digest, descends it where ’tis better
    Silent to be than say; and then drops thence
    Upon another’s blood in natural vase.

There one together with the other mingles,
    One to be passive meant, the other active
    By reason of the perfect place it springs from;

And being conjoined, begins to operate,
    Coagulating first, then vivifying
    What for its matter it had made consistent.

The active virtue, being made a soul
    As of a plant, (in so far different,
    This on the way is, that arrived already,)

Then works so much, that now it moves and feels
    Like a sea-fungus, and then undertakes
    To organize the powers whose seed it is.

Now, Son, dilates and now distends itself
    The virtue from the generator’s heart,
    Where nature is intent on all the members.

But how from animal it man becomes
    Thou dost not see as yet; this is a point
    Which made a wiser man than thou once err

So far, that in his doctrine separate
    He made the soul from possible intellect,
    For he no organ saw by this assumed.

Open thy breast unto the truth that’s coming,
    And know that, just as soon as in the foetus
    The articulation of the brain is perfect,

The primal Motor turns to it well pleased
    At so great art of nature, and inspires
    A spirit new with virtue all replete,

Which what it finds there active doth attract
    Into its substance, and becomes one soul,
    Which lives, and feels, and on itself revolves.

And that thou less may wonder at my word,
    Behold the sun’s heat, which becometh wine,
    Joined to the juice that from the vine distils.

Whenever Lachesis has no more thread,
    It separates from the flesh, and virtually
    Bears with itself the human and divine;

The other faculties are voiceless all;
    The memory, the intelligence, and the will
    In action far more vigorous than before.

Without a pause it falleth of itself
    In marvellous way on one shore or the other;
    There of its roads it first is cognizant.

Soon as the place there circumscribeth it,
    The virtue informative rays round about,
    As, and as much as, in the living members.

And even as the air, when full of rain,
    By alien rays that are therein reflected,
    With divers colours shows itself adorned,

So there the neighbouring air doth shape itself
    Into that form which doth impress upon it
    Virtually the soul that has stood still.

And then in manner of the little flame,
    Which followeth the fire where’er it shifts,
    After the spirit followeth its new form.

Since afterwards it takes from this its semblance,
    It is called shade; and thence it organizes
    Thereafter every sense, even to the sight.

Thence is it that we speak, and thence we laugh;
    Thence is it that we form the tears and sighs,
    That on the mountain thou mayhap hast heard.

According as impress us our desires
    And other affections, so the shade is shaped,
    And this is cause of what thou wonderest at.”

And now unto the last of all the circles
    Had we arrived, and to the right hand turned,
    And were attentive to another care.

There the embankment shoots forth flames of fire,
    And upward doth the cornice breathe a blast
    That drives them back, and from itself sequesters.

Hence we must needs go on the open side,
    And one by one; and I did fear the fire
    On this side, and on that the falling down.

My Leader said: “Along this place one ought
    To keep upon the eyes a tightened rein,
    Seeing that one so easily might err.”

“Summae Deus clementiae,” in the bosom
    Of the great burning chanted then I heard,
    Which made me no less eager to turn round;

And spirits saw I walking through the flame;
    Wherefore I looked, to my own steps and theirs
    Apportioning my sight from time to time.

After the close which to that hymn is made,
    Aloud they shouted, “Virum non cognosco;”
    Then recommenced the hymn with voices low.

This also ended, cried they: “To the wood
    Diana ran, and drove forth Helice
    Therefrom, who had of Venus felt the poison.”

Then to their song returned they; then the wives
    They shouted, and the husbands who were chaste.
    As virtue and the marriage vow imposes.

And I believe that them this mode suffices,
    For all the time the fire is burning them;
    With such care is it needful, and such food,

That the last wound of all should be closed up.







While on the brink thus one before the other
    We went upon our way, oft the good Master
    Said: “Take thou heed! suffice it that I warn thee.”

On the right shoulder smote me now the sun,
    That, raying out, already the whole west
    Changed from its azure aspect into white.

And with my shadow did I make the flame
    Appear more red; and even to such a sign
    Shades saw I many, as they went, give heed.

This was the cause that gave them a beginning
    To speak of me; and to themselves began they
    To say: “That seems not a factitious body!”

Then towards me, as far as they could come,
    Came certain of them, always with regard
    Not to step forth where they would not be burned.

“O thou who goest, not from being slower
    But reverent perhaps, behind the others,
    Answer me, who in thirst and fire am burning.

Nor to me only is thine answer needful;
    For all of these have greater thirst for it
    Than for cold water Ethiop or Indian.

Tell us how is it that thou makest thyself
    A wall unto the sun, as if thou hadst not
    Entered as yet into the net of death.”

Thus one of them addressed me, and I straight
    Should have revealed myself, were I not bent
    On other novelty that then appeared.

For through the middle of the burning road
    There came a people face to face with these,
    Which held me in suspense with gazing at them.

There see I hastening upon either side
    Each of the shades, and kissing one another
    Without a pause, content with brief salute.

Thus in the middle of their brown battalions
    Muzzle to muzzle one ant meets another
    Perchance to spy their journey or their fortune.

No sooner is the friendly greeting ended,
    Or ever the first footstep passes onward,
    Each one endeavours to outcry the other;

The new-come people: “Sodom and Gomorrah!”
    The rest: “Into the cow Pasiphae enters,
    So that the bull unto her lust may run!”

Then as the cranes, that to Riphaean mountains
    Might fly in part, and part towards the sands,
    These of the frost, those of the sun avoidant,

One folk is going, and the other coming,
    And weeping they return to their first songs,
    And to the cry that most befitteth them;

And close to me approached, even as before,
    The very same who had entreated me,
    Attent to listen in their countenance.

I, who their inclination twice had seen,
    Began: “O souls secure in the possession,
    Whene’er it may be, of a state of peace,

Neither unripe nor ripened have remained
    My members upon earth, but here are with me
    With their own blood and their articulations.

I go up here to be no longer blind;
    A Lady is above, who wins this grace,
    Whereby the mortal through your world I bring.

But as your greatest longing satisfied
    May soon become, so that the Heaven may house you
    Which full of love is, and most amply spreads,

Tell me, that I again in books may write it,
    Who are you, and what is that multitude
    Which goes upon its way behind your backs?”

Not otherwise with wonder is bewildered
    The mountaineer, and staring round is dumb,
    When rough and rustic to the town he goes,

Than every shade became in its appearance;
    But when they of their stupor were disburdened,
    Which in high hearts is quickly quieted,

“Blessed be thou, who of our border-lands,”
    He recommenced who first had questioned us,
    “Experience freightest for a better life.

The folk that comes not with us have offended
    In that for which once Caesar, triumphing,
    Heard himself called in contumely, ‘Queen.’

Therefore they separate, exclaiming, ‘Sodom!’
    Themselves reproving, even as thou hast heard,
    And add unto their burning by their shame.

Our own transgression was hermaphrodite;
    But because we observed not human law,
    Following like unto beasts our appetite,

In our opprobrium by us is read,
    When we part company, the name of her
    Who bestialized herself in bestial wood.

Now knowest thou our acts, and what our crime was;
    Wouldst thou perchance by name know who we are,
    There is not time to tell, nor could I do it.

Thy wish to know me shall in sooth be granted;
    I’m Guido Guinicelli, and now purge me,
    Having repented ere the hour extreme.”

The same that in the sadness of Lycurgus
    Two sons became, their mother re-beholding,
    Such I became, but rise not to such height,

The moment I heard name himself the father
    Of me and of my betters, who had ever
    Practised the sweet and gracious rhymes of love;

And without speech and hearing thoughtfully
    For a long time I went, beholding him,
    Nor for the fire did I approach him nearer.

When I was fed with looking, utterly
    Myself I offered ready for his service,
    With affirmation that compels belief.

And he to me: “Thou leavest footprints such
    In me, from what I hear, and so distinct,
    Lethe cannot efface them, nor make dim.

But if thy words just now the truth have sworn,
    Tell me what is the cause why thou displayest
    In word and look that dear thou holdest me?”

And I to him: “Those dulcet lays of yours
    Which, long as shall endure our modern fashion,
    Shall make for ever dear their very ink!”

“O brother,” said he, “he whom I point out,”
    And here he pointed at a spirit in front,
    “Was of the mother tongue a better smith.

Verses of love and proses of romance,
    He mastered all; and let the idiots talk,
    Who think the Lemosin surpasses him.

To clamour more than truth they turn their faces,
    And in this way establish their opinion,
    Ere art or reason has by them been heard.

Thus many ancients with Guittone did,
    From cry to cry still giving him applause,
    Until the truth has conquered with most persons.

Now, if thou hast such ample privilege
    ’Tis granted thee to go unto the cloister
    Wherein is Christ the abbot of the college,

To him repeat for me a Paternoster,
    So far as needful to us of this world,
    Where power of sinning is no longer ours.”

Then, to give place perchance to one behind,
    Whom he had near, he vanished in the fire
    As fish in water going to the bottom.

I moved a little tow’rds him pointed out,
    And said that to his name my own desire
    An honourable place was making ready.

He of his own free will began to say:
    ‘Tan m’ abellis vostre cortes deman,
    Que jeu nom’ puesc ni vueill a vos cobrire;

Jeu sui Arnaut, que plor e vai chantan;
    Consiros vei la passada folor,
    E vei jauzen lo jorn qu’ esper denan.

Ara vus prec per aquella valor,
    Que vus condus al som de la scalina,
    Sovenga vus a temprar ma dolor.’*

Then hid him in the fire that purifies them.

* So pleases me your courteous demand,
    I cannot and I will not hide me from you.
I am Arnaut, who weep and singing go;
    Contrite I see the folly of the past,
    And joyous see the hoped-for day before me.
Therefore do I implore you, by that power
    Which guides you to the summit of the stairs,
    Be mindful to assuage my suffering!







As when he vibrates forth his earliest rays,
    In regions where his Maker shed his blood,
    (The Ebro falling under lofty Libra,

And waters in the Ganges burnt with noon,)
    So stood the Sun; hence was the day departing,
    When the glad Angel of God appeared to us.

Outside the flame he stood upon the verge,
    And chanted forth, “Beati mundo corde,”
    In voice by far more living than our own.

Then: “No one farther goes, souls sanctified,
    If first the fire bite not; within it enter,
    And be not deaf unto the song beyond.”

When we were close beside him thus he said;
    Wherefore e’en such became I, when I heard him,
    As he is who is put into the grave.

Upon my clasped hands I straightened me,
    Scanning the fire, and vividly recalling
    The human bodies I had once seen burned.

Towards me turned themselves my good Conductors,
    And unto me Virgilius said: “My son,
    Here may indeed be torment, but not death.

Remember thee, remember! and if I
    On Geryon have safely guided thee,
    What shall I do now I am nearer God?

Believe for certain, shouldst thou stand a full
    Millennium in the bosom of this flame,
    It could not make thee bald a single hair.

And if perchance thou think that I deceive thee,
    Draw near to it, and put it to the proof
    With thine own hands upon thy garment’s hem.

Now lay aside, now lay aside all fear,
    Turn hitherward, and onward come securely;”
    And I still motionless, and ’gainst my conscience!

Seeing me stand still motionless and stubborn,
    Somewhat disturbed he said: “Now look thou, Son,
    ’Twixt Beatrice and thee there is this wall.”

As at the name of Thisbe oped his lids
    The dying Pyramus, and gazed upon her,
    What time the mulberry became vermilion,

Even thus, my obduracy being softened,
    I turned to my wise Guide, hearing the name
    That in my memory evermore is welling.

Whereat he wagged his head, and said: “How now?
    Shall we stay on this side?” then smiled as one
    Does at a child who’s vanquished by an apple.

Then into the fire in front of me he entered,
    Beseeching Statius to come after me,
    Who a long way before divided us.

When I was in it, into molten glass
    I would have cast me to refresh myself,
    So without measure was the burning there!

And my sweet Father, to encourage me,
    Discoursing still of Beatrice went on,
    Saying: “Her eyes I seem to see already!”

A voice, that on the other side was singing,
    Directed us, and we, attent alone
    On that, came forth where the ascent began.

“Venite, benedicti Patris mei,”
    Sounded within a splendour, which was there
    Such it o’ercame me, and I could not look.

“The sun departs,” it added, “and night cometh;
    Tarry ye not, but onward urge your steps,
    So long as yet the west becomes not dark.”

Straight forward through the rock the path ascended
    In such a way that I cut off the rays
    Before me of the sun, that now was low.

And of few stairs we yet had made assay,
    Ere by the vanished shadow the sun’s setting
    Behind us we perceived, I and my Sages.

And ere in all its parts immeasurable
    The horizon of one aspect had become,
    And Night her boundless dispensation held,

Each of us of a stair had made his bed;
    Because the nature of the mount took from us
    The power of climbing, more than the delight.

Even as in ruminating passive grow
    The goats, who have been swift and venturesome
    Upon the mountain-tops ere they were fed,

Hushed in the shadow, while the sun is hot,
    Watched by the herdsman, who upon his staff
    Is leaning, and in leaning tendeth them;

And as the shepherd, lodging out of doors,
    Passes the night beside his quiet flock,
    Watching that no wild beast may scatter it,

Such at that hour were we, all three of us,
    I like the goat, and like the herdsmen they,
    Begirt on this side and on that by rocks.

Little could there be seen of things without;
    But through that little I beheld the stars
    More luminous and larger than their wont.

Thus ruminating, and beholding these,
    Sleep seized upon me,—sleep, that oftentimes
    Before a deed is done has tidings of it.

It was the hour, I think, when from the East
    First on the mountain Citherea beamed,
    Who with the fire of love seems always burning;

Youthful and beautiful in dreams methought
    I saw a lady walking in a meadow,
    Gathering flowers; and singing she was saying:

“Know whosoever may my name demand
    That I am Leah, and go moving round
    My beauteous hands to make myself a garland.

To please me at the mirror, here I deck me,
    But never does my sister Rachel leave
    Her looking-glass, and sitteth all day long.

To see her beauteous eyes as eager is she,
    As I am to adorn me with my hands;
    Her, seeing, and me, doing satisfies.”

And now before the antelucan splendours
    That unto pilgrims the more grateful rise,
    As, home-returning, less remote they lodge,

The darkness fled away on every side,
    And slumber with it; whereupon I rose,
    Seeing already the great Masters risen.

“That apple sweet, which through so many branches
    The care of mortals goeth in pursuit of,
    To-day shall put in peace thy hungerings.”

Speaking to me, Virgilius of such words
    As these made use; and never were there guerdons
    That could in pleasantness compare with these.

Such longing upon longing came upon me
    To be above, that at each step thereafter
    For flight I felt in me the pinions growing.

When underneath us was the stairway all
    Run o’er, and we were on the highest step,
    Virgilius fastened upon me his eyes,

And said: “The temporal fire and the eternal,
    Son, thou hast seen, and to a place art come
    Where of myself no farther I discern.

By intellect and art I here have brought thee;
    Take thine own pleasure for thy guide henceforth;
    Beyond the steep ways and the narrow art thou.

Behold the sun, that shines upon thy forehead;
    Behold the grass, the flowerets, and the shrubs
    Which of itself alone this land produces.

Until rejoicing come the beauteous eyes
    Which weeping caused me to come unto thee,
    Thou canst sit down, and thou canst walk among them.

Expect no more or word or sign from me;
    Free and upright and sound is thy free-will,
    And error were it not to do its bidding;

Thee o’er thyself I therefore crown and mitre!”






Eager already to search in and round
    The heavenly forest, dense and living-green,
    Which tempered to the eyes the new-born day,

Withouten more delay I left the bank,
    Taking the level country slowly, slowly
    Over the soil that everywhere breathes fragrance.

A softly-breathing air, that no mutation
    Had in itself, upon the forehead smote me
    No heavier blow than of a gentle wind,

Whereat the branches, lightly tremulous,
    Did all of them bow downward toward that side
    Where its first shadow casts the Holy Mountain;

Yet not from their upright direction swayed,
    So that the little birds upon their tops
    Should leave the practice of each art of theirs;

But with full ravishment the hours of prime,
    Singing, received they in the midst of leaves,
    That ever bore a burden to their rhymes,

Such as from branch to branch goes gathering on
    Through the pine forest on the shore of Chiassi,
    When Eolus unlooses the Sirocco.

Already my slow steps had carried me
    Into the ancient wood so far, that I
    Could not perceive where I had entered it.

And lo! my further course a stream cut off,
    Which tow’rd the left hand with its little waves
    Bent down the grass that on its margin sprang.

All waters that on earth most limpid are
    Would seem to have within themselves some mixture
    Compared with that which nothing doth conceal,

Although it moves on with a brown, brown current
    Under the shade perpetual, that never
    Ray of the sun lets in, nor of the moon.

With feet I stayed, and with mine eyes I passed
    Beyond the rivulet, to look upon
    The great variety of the fresh may.

And there appeared to me (even as appears
    Suddenly something that doth turn aside
    Through very wonder every other thought)

A lady all alone, who went along
    Singing and culling floweret after floweret,
    With which her pathway was all painted over.

“Ah, beauteous lady, who in rays of love
    Dost warm thyself, if I may trust to looks,
    Which the heart’s witnesses are wont to be,

May the desire come unto thee to draw
    Near to this river’s bank,” I said to her,
    “So much that I might hear what thou art singing.

Thou makest me remember where and what
    Proserpina that moment was when lost
    Her mother her, and she herself the Spring.”

As turns herself, with feet together pressed
    And to the ground, a lady who is dancing,
    And hardly puts one foot before the other,

On the vermilion and the yellow flowerets
    She turned towards me, not in other wise
    Than maiden who her modest eyes casts down;

And my entreaties made to be content,
    So near approaching, that the dulcet sound
    Came unto me together with its meaning

As soon as she was where the grasses are.
    Bathed by the waters of the beauteous river,
    To lift her eyes she granted me the boon.

I do not think there shone so great a light
    Under the lids of Venus, when transfixed
    By her own son, beyond his usual custom!

Erect upon the other bank she smiled,
    Bearing full many colours in her hands,
    Which that high land produces without seed.

Apart three paces did the river make us;
    But Hellespont, where Xerxes passed across,
    (A curb still to all human arrogance,)

More hatred from Leander did not suffer
    For rolling between Sestos and Abydos,
    Than that from me, because it oped not then.

“Ye are new-comers; and because I smile,”
    Began she, “peradventure, in this place
    Elect to human nature for its nest,

Some apprehension keeps you marvelling;
    But the psalm ‘Delectasti’ giveth light
    Which has the power to uncloud your intellect.

And thou who foremost art, and didst entreat me,
    Speak, if thou wouldst hear more; for I came ready
    To all thy questionings, as far as needful.”

“The water,” said I, “and the forest’s sound,
    Are combating within me my new faith
    In something which I heard opposed to this.”

Whence she: “I will relate how from its cause
    Proceedeth that which maketh thee to wonder,
    And purge away the cloud that smites upon thee.

The Good Supreme, sole in itself delighting,
    Created man good, and this goodly place
    Gave him as hansel of eternal peace.

By his default short while he sojourned here;
    By his default to weeping and to toil
    He changed his innocent laughter and sweet play.

That the disturbance which below is made
    By exhalations of the land and water,
    (Which far as may be follow after heat,)

Might not upon mankind wage any war,
    This mount ascended tow’rds the heaven so high,
    And is exempt, from there where it is locked.

Now since the universal atmosphere
    Turns in a circuit with the primal motion
    Unless the circle is broken on some side,

Upon this height, that all is disengaged
    In living ether, doth this motion strike
    And make the forest sound, for it is dense;

And so much power the stricken plant possesses
    That with its virtue it impregns the air,
    And this, revolving, scatters it around;

And yonder earth, according as ’tis worthy
    In self or in its clime, conceives and bears
    Of divers qualities the divers trees;

It should not seem a marvel then on earth,
    This being heard, whenever any plant
    Without seed manifest there taketh root.

And thou must know, this holy table-land
    In which thou art is full of every seed,
    And fruit has in it never gathered there.

The water which thou seest springs not from vein
    Restored by vapour that the cold condenses,
    Like to a stream that gains or loses breath;

But issues from a fountain safe and certain,
    Which by the will of God as much regains
    As it discharges, open on two sides.

Upon this side with virtue it descends,
    Which takes away all memory of sin;
    On that, of every good deed done restores it.

Here Lethe, as upon the other side
    Eunoe, it is called; and worketh not
    If first on either side it be not tasted.

This every other savour doth transcend;
    And notwithstanding slaked so far may be
    Thy thirst, that I reveal to thee no more,

I’ll give thee a corollary still in grace,
    Nor think my speech will be to thee less dear
    If it spread out beyond my promise to thee.

Those who in ancient times have feigned in song
    The Age of Gold and its felicity,
    Dreamed of this place perhaps upon Parnassus.

Here was the human race in innocence;
    Here evermore was Spring, and every fruit;
    This is the nectar of which each one speaks.”

Then backward did I turn me wholly round
    Unto my Poets, and saw that with a smile
    They had been listening to these closing words;

Then to the beautiful lady turned mine eyes.







Singing like unto an enamoured lady
    She, with the ending of her words, continued:
    “Beati quorum tecta sunt peccata.”

And even as Nymphs, that wandered all alone
    Among the sylvan shadows, sedulous
    One to avoid and one to see the sun,

She then against the stream moved onward, going
    Along the bank, and I abreast of her,
    Her little steps with little steps attending.

Between her steps and mine were not a hundred,
    When equally the margins gave a turn,
    In such a way, that to the East I faced.

Nor even thus our way continued far
    Before the lady wholly turned herself
    Unto me, saying, “Brother, look and listen!”

And lo! a sudden lustre ran across
    On every side athwart the spacious forest,
    Such that it made me doubt if it were lightning.

But since the lightning ceases as it comes,
    And that continuing brightened more and more,
    Within my thought I said, “What thing is this?”

And a delicious melody there ran
    Along the luminous air, whence holy zeal
    Made me rebuke the hardihood of Eve;

For there where earth and heaven obedient were,
    The woman only, and but just created,
    Could not endure to stay ’neath any veil;

Underneath which had she devoutly stayed,
    I sooner should have tasted those delights
    Ineffable, and for a longer time.

While ’mid such manifold first-fruits I walked
    Of the eternal pleasure all enrapt,
    And still solicitous of more delights,

In front of us like an enkindled fire
    Became the air beneath the verdant boughs,
    And the sweet sound as singing now was heard.

O Virgins sacrosanct! if ever hunger,
    Vigils, or cold for you I have endured,
    The occasion spurs me their reward to claim!

Now Helicon must needs pour forth for me,
    And with her choir Urania must assist me,
    To put in verse things difficult to think.

A little farther on, seven trees of gold
    In semblance the long space still intervening
    Between ourselves and them did counterfeit;

But when I had approached so near to them
    The common object, which the sense deceives,
    Lost not by distance any of its marks,

The faculty that lends discourse to reason
    Did apprehend that they were candlesticks,
    And in the voices of the song “Hosanna!”

Above them flamed the harness beautiful,
    Far brighter than the moon in the serene
    Of midnight, at the middle of her month.

I turned me round, with admiration filled,
    To good Virgilius, and he answered me
    With visage no less full of wonderment.

Then back I turned my face to those high things,
    Which moved themselves towards us so sedately,
    They had been distanced by new-wedded brides.

The lady chid me: “Why dost thou burn only
    So with affection for the living lights,
    And dost not look at what comes after them?”

Then saw I people, as behind their leaders,
    Coming behind them, garmented in white,
    And such a whiteness never was on earth.

The water on my left flank was resplendent,
    And back to me reflected my left side,
    E’en as a mirror, if I looked therein.

When I upon my margin had such post
    That nothing but the stream divided us,
    Better to see I gave my steps repose;

And I beheld the flamelets onward go,
    Leaving behind themselves the air depicted,
    And they of trailing pennons had the semblance,

So that it overhead remained distinct
    With sevenfold lists, all of them of the colours
    Whence the sun’s bow is made, and Delia’s girdle.

These standards to the rearward longer were
    Than was my sight; and, as it seemed to me,
    Ten paces were the outermost apart.

Under so fair a heaven as I describe
    The four and twenty Elders, two by two,
    Came on incoronate with flower-de-luce.

They all of them were singing: “Blessed thou
    Among the daughters of Adam art, and blessed
    For evermore shall be thy loveliness.”

After the flowers and other tender grasses
    In front of me upon the other margin
    Were disencumbered of that race elect,

Even as in heaven star followeth after star,
    There came close after them four animals,
    Incoronate each one with verdant leaf.

Plumed with six wings was every one of them,
    The plumage full of eyes; the eyes of Argus
    If they were living would be such as these.

Reader! to trace their forms no more I waste
    My rhymes; for other spendings press me so,
    That I in this cannot be prodigal.

But read Ezekiel, who depicteth them
    As he beheld them from the region cold
    Coming with cloud, with whirlwind, and with fire;

And such as thou shalt find them in his pages,
    Such were they here; saving that in their plumage
    John is with me, and differeth from him.

The interval between these four contained
    A chariot triumphal on two wheels,
    Which by a Griffin’s neck came drawn along;

And upward he extended both his wings
    Between the middle list and three and three,
    So that he injured none by cleaving it.

So high they rose that they were lost to sight;
    His limbs were gold, so far as he was bird,
    And white the others with vermilion mingled.

Not only Rome with no such splendid car
    E’er gladdened Africanus, or Augustus,
    But poor to it that of the Sun would be,—

That of the Sun, which swerving was burnt up
    At the importunate orison of Earth,
    When Jove was so mysteriously just.

Three maidens at the right wheel in a circle
    Came onward dancing; one so very red
    That in the fire she hardly had been noted.

The second was as if her flesh and bones
    Had all been fashioned out of emerald;
    The third appeared as snow but newly fallen.

And now they seemed conducted by the white,
    Now by the red, and from the song of her
    The others took their step, or slow or swift.

Upon the left hand four made holiday
    Vested in purple, following the measure
    Of one of them with three eyes m her head.

In rear of all the group here treated of
    Two old men I beheld, unlike in habit,
    But like in gait, each dignified and grave.

One showed himself as one of the disciples
    Of that supreme Hippocrates, whom nature
    Made for the animals she holds most dear;

Contrary care the other manifested,
    With sword so shining and so sharp, it caused
    Terror to me on this side of the river.

Thereafter four I saw of humble aspect,
    And behind all an aged man alone
    Walking in sleep with countenance acute.

And like the foremost company these seven
    Were habited; yet of the flower-de-luce
    No garland round about the head they wore,

But of the rose, and other flowers vermilion;
    At little distance would the sight have sworn
    That all were in a flame above their brows.

And when the car was opposite to me
    Thunder was heard; and all that folk august
    Seemed to have further progress interdicted,

There with the vanward ensigns standing still.







When the Septentrion of the highest heaven
    (Which never either setting knew or rising,
    Nor veil of other cloud than that of sin,

And which made every one therein aware
    Of his own duty, as the lower makes
    Whoever turns the helm to come to port)

Motionless halted, the veracious people,
    That came at first between it and the Griffin,
    Turned themselves to the car, as to their peace.

And one of them, as if by Heaven commissioned,
    Singing, “Veni, sponsa, de Libano”
    Shouted three times, and all the others after.

Even as the Blessed at the final summons
    Shall rise up quickened each one from his cavern,
    Uplifting light the reinvested flesh,

So upon that celestial chariot
    A hundred rose ‘ad vocem tanti senis,’
    Ministers and messengers of life eternal.

They all were saying, “Benedictus qui venis,”
    And, scattering flowers above and round about,
    “Manibus o date lilia plenis.”

Ere now have I beheld, as day began,
    The eastern hemisphere all tinged with rose,
    And the other heaven with fair serene adorned;

And the sun’s face, uprising, overshadowed
    So that by tempering influence of vapours
    For a long interval the eye sustained it;

Thus in the bosom of a cloud of flowers
    Which from those hands angelical ascended,
    And downward fell again inside and out,

Over her snow-white veil with olive cinct
    Appeared a lady under a green mantle,
    Vested in colour of the living flame.

And my own spirit, that already now
    So long a time had been, that in her presence
    Trembling with awe it had not stood abashed,

Without more knowledge having by mine eyes,
    Through occult virtue that from her proceeded
    Of ancient love the mighty influence felt.

As soon as on my vision smote the power
    Sublime, that had already pierced me through
    Ere from my boyhood I had yet come forth,

To the left hand I turned with that reliance
    With which the little child runs to his mother,
    When he has fear, or when he is afflicted,

To say unto Virgilius: “Not a drachm
    Of blood remains in me, that does not tremble;
    I know the traces of the ancient flame.”

But us Virgilius of himself deprived
    Had left, Virgilius, sweetest of all fathers,
    Virgilius, to whom I for safety gave me:

Nor whatsoever lost the ancient mother
    Availed my cheeks now purified from dew,
    That weeping they should not again be darkened.

“Dante, because Virgilius has departed
    Do not weep yet, do not weep yet awhile;
    For by another sword thou need’st must weep.”

E’en as an admiral, who on poop and prow
    Comes to behold the people that are working
    In other ships, and cheers them to well-doing,

Upon the left hand border of the car,
    When at the sound I turned of my own name,
    Which of necessity is here recorded,

I saw the Lady, who erewhile appeared
    Veiled underneath the angelic festival,
    Direct her eyes to me across the river.

Although the veil, that from her head descended,
    Encircled with the foliage of Minerva,
    Did not permit her to appear distinctly,

In attitude still royally majestic
    Continued she, like unto one who speaks,
    And keeps his warmest utterance in reserve:

“Look at me well; in sooth I’m Beatrice!
    How didst thou deign to come unto the Mountain?
    Didst thou not know that man is happy here?”

Mine eyes fell downward into the clear fountain,
    But, seeing myself therein, I sought the grass,
    So great a shame did weigh my forehead down.

As to the son the mother seems superb,
    So she appeared to me; for somewhat bitter
    Tasteth the savour of severe compassion.

Silent became she, and the Angels sang
    Suddenly, “In te, Domine, speravi:”
    But beyond ‘pedes meos’ did not pass.

Even as the snow among the living rafters
    Upon the back of Italy congeals,
    Blown on and drifted by Sclavonian winds,

And then, dissolving, trickles through itself
    Whene’er the land that loses shadow breathes,
    So that it seems a fire that melts a taper;

E’en thus was I without a tear or sigh,
    Before the song of those who sing for ever
    After the music of the eternal spheres.

But when I heard in their sweet melodies
    Compassion for me, more than had they said,
    “O wherefore, lady, dost thou thus upbraid him?”

The ice, that was about my heart congealed,
    To air and water changed, and in my anguish
    Through mouth and eyes came gushing from my breast.

She, on the right-hand border of the car
    Still firmly standing, to those holy beings
    Thus her discourse directed afterwards:

“Ye keep your watch in the eternal day,
    So that nor night nor sleep can steal from you
    One step the ages make upon their path;

Therefore my answer is with greater care,
    That he may hear me who is weeping yonder,
    So that the sin and dole be of one measure.

Not only by the work of those great wheels,
    That destine every seed unto some end,
    According as the stars are in conjunction,

But by the largess of celestial graces,
    Which have such lofty vapours for their rain
    That near to them our sight approaches not,

Such had this man become in his new life
    Potentially, that every righteous habit
    Would have made admirable proof in him;

But so much more malignant and more savage
    Becomes the land untilled and with bad seed,
    The more good earthly vigour it possesses.

Some time did I sustain him with my look;
    Revealing unto him my youthful eyes,
    I led him with me turned in the right way.

As soon as ever of my second age
    I was upon the threshold and changed life,
    Himself from me he took and gave to others.

When from the flesh to spirit I ascended,
    And beauty and virtue were in me increased,
    I was to him less dear and less delightful;

And into ways untrue he turned his steps,
    Pursuing the false images of good,
    That never any promises fulfil;

Nor prayer for inspiration me availed,
    By means of which in dreams and otherwise
    I called him back, so little did he heed them.

So low he fell, that all appliances
    For his salvation were already short,
    Save showing him the people of perdition.

For this I visited the gates of death,
    And unto him, who so far up has led him,
    My intercessions were with weeping borne.

God’s lofty fiat would be violated,
    If Lethe should be passed, and if such viands
    Should tasted be, withouten any scot

Of penitence, that gushes forth in tears.”







“O thou who art beyond the sacred river,”
    Turning to me the point of her discourse,
    That edgewise even had seemed to me so keen,

She recommenced, continuing without pause,
    “Say, say if this be true; to such a charge,
    Thy own confession needs must be conjoined.”

My faculties were in so great confusion,
    That the voice moved, but sooner was extinct
    Than by its organs it was set at large.

Awhile she waited; then she said: “What thinkest?
    Answer me; for the mournful memories
    In thee not yet are by the waters injured.”

Confusion and dismay together mingled
    Forced such a Yes! from out my mouth, that sight
    Was needful to the understanding of it.

Even as a cross-bow breaks, when ’tis discharged
    Too tensely drawn the bowstring and the bow,
    And with less force the arrow hits the mark,

So I gave way beneath that heavy burden,
    Outpouring in a torrent tears and sighs,
    And the voice flagged upon its passage forth.

Whence she to me: “In those desires of mine
    Which led thee to the loving of that good,
    Beyond which there is nothing to aspire to,

What trenches lying traverse or what chains
    Didst thou discover, that of passing onward
    Thou shouldst have thus despoiled thee of the hope?

And what allurements or what vantages
    Upon the forehead of the others showed,
    That thou shouldst turn thy footsteps unto them?”

After the heaving of a bitter sigh,
    Hardly had I the voice to make response,
    And with fatigue my lips did fashion it.

Weeping I said: “The things that present were
    With their false pleasure turned aside my steps,
    Soon as your countenance concealed itself.”

And she: “Shouldst thou be silent, or deny
    What thou confessest, not less manifest
    Would be thy fault, by such a Judge ’tis known.

But when from one’s own cheeks comes bursting forth
    The accusal of the sin, in our tribunal
    Against the edge the wheel doth turn itself.

But still, that thou mayst feel a greater shame
    For thy transgression, and another time
    Hearing the Sirens thou mayst be more strong,

Cast down the seed of weeping and attend;
    So shalt thou hear, how in an opposite way
    My buried flesh should have directed thee.

Never to thee presented art or nature
    Pleasure so great as the fair limbs wherein
    I was enclosed, which scattered are in earth.

And if the highest pleasure thus did fail thee
    By reason of my death, what mortal thing
    Should then have drawn thee into its desire?

Thou oughtest verily at the first shaft
    Of things fallacious to have risen up
    To follow me, who was no longer such.

Thou oughtest not to have stooped thy pinions downward
    To wait for further blows, or little girl,
    Or other vanity of such brief use.

The callow birdlet waits for two or three,
    But to the eyes of those already fledged,
    In vain the net is spread or shaft is shot.”

Even as children silent in their shame
    Stand listening with their eyes upon the ground,
    And conscious of their fault, and penitent;

So was I standing; and she said: “If thou
    In hearing sufferest pain, lift up thy beard
    And thou shalt feel a greater pain in seeing.”

With less resistance is a robust holm
    Uprooted, either by a native wind
    Or else by that from regions of Iarbas,

Than I upraised at her command my chin;
    And when she by the beard the face demanded,
    Well I perceived the venom of her meaning.

And as my countenance was lifted up,
    Mine eye perceived those creatures beautiful
    Had rested from the strewing of the flowers;

And, still but little reassured, mine eyes
    Saw Beatrice turned round towards the monster,
    That is one person only in two natures.

Beneath her veil, beyond the margent green,
    She seemed to me far more her ancient self
    To excel, than others here, when she was here.

So pricked me then the thorn of penitence,
    That of all other things the one which turned me
    Most to its love became the most my foe.

Such self-conviction stung me at the heart
    O’erpowered I fell, and what I then became
    She knoweth who had furnished me the cause.

Then, when the heart restored my outward sense,
    The lady I had found alone, above me
    I saw, and she was saying, “Hold me, hold me.”

Up to my throat she in the stream had drawn me,
    And, dragging me behind her, she was moving
    Upon the water lightly as a shuttle.

When I was near unto the blessed shore,
    “Asperges me,” I heard so sweetly sung,
    Remember it I cannot, much less write it.

The beautiful lady opened wide her arms,
    Embraced my head, and plunged me underneath,
    Where I was forced to swallow of the water.

Then forth she drew me, and all dripping brought
    Into the dance of the four beautiful,
    And each one with her arm did cover me.

‘We here are Nymphs, and in the Heaven are stars;
    Ere Beatrice descended to the world,
    We as her handmaids were appointed her.

We’ll lead thee to her eyes; but for the pleasant
    Light that within them is, shall sharpen thine
    The three beyond, who more profoundly look.’

Thus singing they began; and afterwards
    Unto the Griffin’s breast they led me with them,
    Where Beatrice was standing, turned towards us.

“See that thou dost not spare thine eyes,” they said;
    “Before the emeralds have we stationed thee,
    Whence Love aforetime drew for thee his weapons.”

A thousand longings, hotter than the flame,
    Fastened mine eyes upon those eyes relucent,
    That still upon the Griffin steadfast stayed.

As in a glass the sun, not otherwise
    Within them was the twofold monster shining,
    Now with the one, now with the other nature.

Think, Reader, if within myself I marvelled,
    When I beheld the thing itself stand still,
    And in its image it transformed itself.

While with amazement filled and jubilant,
    My soul was tasting of the food, that while
    It satisfies us makes us hunger for it,

Themselves revealing of the highest rank
    In bearing, did the other three advance,
    Singing to their angelic saraband.

“Turn, Beatrice, O turn thy holy eyes,”
    Such was their song, “unto thy faithful one,
    Who has to see thee ta’en so many steps.

In grace do us the grace that thou unveil
    Thy face to him, so that he may discern
    The second beauty which thou dost conceal.”

O splendour of the living light eternal!
    Who underneath the shadow of Parnassus
    Has grown so pale, or drunk so at its cistern,

He would not seem to have his mind encumbered
    Striving to paint thee as thou didst appear,
    Where the harmonious heaven o’ershadowed thee,

When in the open air thou didst unveil?







So steadfast and attentive were mine eyes
    In satisfying their decennial thirst,
    That all my other senses were extinct,

And upon this side and on that they had
    Walls of indifference, so the holy smile
    Drew them unto itself with the old net

When forcibly my sight was turned away
    Towards my left hand by those goddesses,
    Because I heard from them a “Too intently!”

And that condition of the sight which is
    In eyes but lately smitten by the sun
    Bereft me of my vision some short while;

But to the less when sight re-shaped itself,
    I say the less in reference to the greater
    Splendour from which perforce I had withdrawn,

I saw upon its right wing wheeled about
    The glorious host returning with the sun
    And with the sevenfold flames upon their faces.

As underneath its shields, to save itself,
    A squadron turns, and with its banner wheels,
    Before the whole thereof can change its front,

That soldiery of the celestial kingdom
    Which marched in the advance had wholly passed us
    Before the chariot had turned its pole.

Then to the wheels the maidens turned themselves,
    And the Griffin moved his burden benedight,
    But so that not a feather of him fluttered.

The lady fair who drew me through the ford
    Followed with Statius and myself the wheel
    Which made its orbit with the lesser arc.

So passing through the lofty forest, vacant
    By fault of her who in the serpent trusted,
    Angelic music made our steps keep time.

Perchance as great a space had in three flights
    An arrow loosened from the string o’erpassed,
    As we had moved when Beatrice descended.

I heard them murmur altogether, “Adam!”
    Then circled they about a tree despoiled
    Of blooms and other leafage on each bough.

Its tresses, which so much the more dilate
    As higher they ascend, had been by Indians
    Among their forests marvelled at for height.

“Blessed art thou, O Griffin, who dost not
    Pluck with thy beak these branches sweet to taste,
    Since appetite by this was turned to evil.”

After this fashion round the tree robust
    The others shouted; and the twofold creature:
    “Thus is preserved the seed of all the just.”

And turning to the pole which he had dragged,
    He drew it close beneath the widowed bough,
    And what was of it unto it left bound.

In the same manner as our trees (when downward
    Falls the great light, with that together mingled
    Which after the celestial Lasca shines)

Begin to swell, and then renew themselves,
    Each one with its own colour, ere the Sun
    Harness his steeds beneath another star:

Less than of rose and more than violet
    A hue disclosing, was renewed the tree
    That had erewhile its boughs so desolate.

I never heard, nor here below is sung,
    The hymn which afterward that people sang,
    Nor did I bear the melody throughout.

Had I the power to paint how fell asleep
    Those eyes compassionless, of Syrinx hearing,
    Those eyes to which more watching cost so dear,

Even as a painter who from model paints
    I would portray how I was lulled asleep;
    He may, who well can picture drowsihood.

Therefore I pass to what time I awoke,
    And say a splendour rent from me the veil
    Of slumber, and a calling: “Rise, what dost thou?”

As to behold the apple-tree in blossom
    Which makes the Angels greedy for its fruit,
    And keeps perpetual bridals in the Heaven,

Peter and John and James conducted were,
    And, overcome, recovered at the word
    By which still greater slumbers have been broken,

And saw their school diminished by the loss
    Not only of Elias, but of Moses,
    And the apparel of their Master changed;

So I revived, and saw that piteous one
    Above me standing, who had been conductress
    Aforetime of my steps beside the river,

And all in doubt I said, “Where’s Beatrice?”
    And she: “Behold her seated underneath
    The leafage new, upon the root of it.

Behold the company that circles her;
    The rest behind the Griffin are ascending
    With more melodious song, and more profound.”

And if her speech were more diffuse I know not,
    Because already in my sight was she
    Who from the hearing of aught else had shut me.

Alone she sat upon the very earth,
    Left there as guardian of the chariot
    Which I had seen the biform monster fasten.

Encircling her, a cloister made themselves
    The seven Nymphs, with those lights in their hands
    Which are secure from Aquilon and Auster.

“Short while shalt thou be here a forester,
    And thou shalt be with me for evermore
    A citizen of that Rome where Christ is Roman.

Therefore, for that world’s good which liveth ill,
    Fix on the car thine eyes, and what thou seest,
    Having returned to earth, take heed thou write.”

Thus Beatrice; and I, who at the feet
    Of her commandments all devoted was,
    My mind and eyes directed where she willed.

Never descended with so swift a motion
    Fire from a heavy cloud, when it is raining
    From out the region which is most remote,

As I beheld the bird of Jove descend
    Down through the tree, rending away the bark,
    As well as blossoms and the foliage new,

And he with all his might the chariot smote,
    Whereat it reeled, like vessel in a tempest
    Tossed by the waves, now starboard and now larboard.

Thereafter saw I leap into the body
    Of the triumphal vehicle a Fox,
    That seemed unfed with any wholesome food.

But for his hideous sins upbraiding him,
    My Lady put him to as swift a flight
    As such a fleshless skeleton could bear.

Then by the way that it before had come,
    Into the chariot’s chest I saw the Eagle
    Descend, and leave it feathered with his plumes.

And such as issues from a heart that mourns,
    A voice from Heaven there issued, and it said:
    “My little bark, how badly art thou freighted!”

Methought, then, that the earth did yawn between
    Both wheels, and I saw rise from it a Dragon,
    Who through the chariot upward fixed his tail,

And as a wasp that draweth back its sting,
    Drawing unto himself his tail malign,
    Drew out the floor, and went his way rejoicing.

That which remained behind, even as with grass
    A fertile region, with the feathers, offered
    Perhaps with pure intention and benign,

Reclothed itself, and with them were reclothed
    The pole and both the wheels so speedily,
    A sigh doth longer keep the lips apart.

Transfigured thus the holy edifice
    Thrust forward heads upon the parts of it,
    Three on the pole and one at either corner.

The first were horned like oxen; but the four
    Had but a single horn upon the forehead;
    A monster such had never yet been seen!

Firm as a rock upon a mountain high,
    Seated upon it, there appeared to me
    A shameless whore, with eyes swift glancing round,

And, as if not to have her taken from him,
    Upright beside her I beheld a giant;
    And ever and anon they kissed each other.

But because she her wanton, roving eye
    Turned upon me, her angry paramour
    Did scourge her from her head unto her feet.

Then full of jealousy, and fierce with wrath,
    He loosed the monster, and across the forest
    Dragged it so far, he made of that alone

A shield unto the whore and the strange beast.






“Deus venerunt gentes,” alternating
    Now three, now four, melodious psalmody
    The maidens in the midst of tears began;

And Beatrice, compassionate and sighing,
    Listened to them with such a countenance,
    That scarce more changed was Mary at the cross.

But when the other virgins place had given
    For her to speak, uprisen to her feet
    With colour as of fire, she made response:

“‘Modicum, et non videbitis me;
    Et iterum,’ my sisters predilect,
    ‘Modicum, et vos videbitis me.’”

Then all the seven in front of her she placed;
    And after her, by beckoning only, moved
    Me and the lady and the sage who stayed.

So she moved onward; and I do not think
    That her tenth step was placed upon the ground,
    When with her eyes upon mine eyes she smote,

And with a tranquil aspect, “Come more quickly,”
    To me she said, “that, if I speak with thee,
    To listen to me thou mayst be well placed.”

As soon as I was with her as I should be,
    She said to me: “Why, brother, dost thou not
    Venture to question now, in coming with me?”

As unto those who are too reverential,
    Speaking in presence of superiors,
    Who drag no living utterance to their teeth,

It me befell, that without perfect sound
    Began I: “My necessity, Madonna,
    You know, and that which thereunto is good.”

And she to me: “Of fear and bashfulness
    Henceforward I will have thee strip thyself,
    So that thou speak no more as one who dreams.

Know that the vessel which the serpent broke
    Was, and is not; but let him who is guilty
    Think that God’s vengeance does not fear a sop.

Without an heir shall not for ever be
    The Eagle that left his plumes upon the car,
    Whence it became a monster, then a prey;

For verily I see, and hence narrate it,
    The stars already near to bring the time,
    From every hindrance safe, and every bar,

Within which a Five-hundred, Ten, and Five,
    One sent from God, shall slay the thievish woman
    And that same giant who is sinning with her.

And peradventure my dark utterance,
    Like Themis and the Sphinx, may less persuade thee,
    Since, in their mode, it clouds the intellect;

But soon the facts shall be the Naiades
    Who shall this difficult enigma solve,
    Without destruction of the flocks and harvests.

Note thou; and even as by me are uttered
    These words, so teach them unto those who live
    That life which is a running unto death;

And bear in mind, whene’er thou writest them,
    Not to conceal what thou hast seen the plant,
    That twice already has been pillaged here.

Whoever pillages or shatters it,
    With blasphemy of deed offendeth God,
    Who made it holy for his use alone.

For biting that, in pain and in desire
    Five thousand years and more the first-born soul
    Craved Him, who punished in himself the bite.

Thy genius slumbers, if it deem it not
    For special reason so pre-eminent
    In height, and so inverted in its summit.

And if thy vain imaginings had not been
    Water of Elsa round about thy mind,
    And Pyramus to the mulberry, their pleasure,

Thou by so many circumstances only
    The justice of the interdict of God
    Morally in the tree wouldst recognize.

But since I see thee in thine intellect
    Converted into stone and stained with sin,
    So that the light of my discourse doth daze thee,

I will too, if not written, at least painted,
    Thou bear it back within thee, for the reason
    That cinct with palm the pilgrim’s staff is borne.”

And I: “As by a signet is the wax
    Which does not change the figure stamped upon it,
    My brain is now imprinted by yourself.

But wherefore so beyond my power of sight
    Soars your desirable discourse, that aye
    The more I strive, so much the more I lose it?”

“That thou mayst recognize,” she said, “the school
    Which thou hast followed, and mayst see how far
    Its doctrine follows after my discourse,

And mayst behold your path from the divine
    Distant as far as separated is
    From earth the heaven that highest hastens on.”

Whence her I answered: “I do not remember
    That ever I estranged myself from you,
    Nor have I conscience of it that reproves me.”

“And if thou art not able to remember,”
    Smiling she answered, “recollect thee now
    That thou this very day hast drunk of Lethe;

And if from smoke a fire may be inferred,
    Such an oblivion clearly demonstrates
    Some error in thy will elsewhere intent.

Truly from this time forward shall my words
    Be naked, so far as it is befitting
    To lay them open unto thy rude gaze.”

And more coruscant and with slower steps
    The sun was holding the meridian circle,
    Which, with the point of view, shifts here and there

When halted (as he cometh to a halt,
    Who goes before a squadron as its escort,
    If something new he find upon his way)

The ladies seven at a dark shadow’s edge,
    Such as, beneath green leaves and branches black,
    The Alp upon its frigid border wears.

In front of them the Tigris and Euphrates
    Methought I saw forth issue from one fountain,
    And slowly part, like friends, from one another.

“O light, O glory of the human race!
    What stream is this which here unfolds itself
    From out one source, and from itself withdraws?”

For such a prayer, ’twas said unto me, “Pray
    Matilda that she tell thee;” and here answered,
    As one does who doth free himself from blame,

The beautiful lady: “This and other things
    Were told to him by me; and sure I am
    The water of Lethe has not hid them from him.”

And Beatrice: “Perhaps a greater care,
    Which oftentimes our memory takes away,
    Has made the vision of his mind obscure.

But Eunoe behold, that yonder rises;
    Lead him to it, and, as thou art accustomed,
    Revive again the half-dead virtue in him.”

Like gentle soul, that maketh no excuse,
    But makes its own will of another’s will
    As soon as by a sign it is disclosed,

Even so, when she had taken hold of me,
    The beautiful lady moved, and unto Statius
    Said, in her womanly manner, “Come with him.”

If, Reader, I possessed a longer space
    For writing it, I yet would sing in part
    Of the sweet draught that ne’er would satiate me;

But inasmuch as full are all the leaves
    Made ready for this second canticle,
    The curb of art no farther lets me go.

From the most holy water I returned
    Regenerate, in the manner of new trees
    That are renewed with a new foliage,

Pure and disposed to mount unto the stars.











The glory of Him who moveth everything
    Doth penetrate the universe, and shine
    In one part more and in another less.

Within that heaven which most his light receives
    Was I, and things beheld which to repeat
    Nor knows, nor can, who from above descends;

Because in drawing near to its desire
    Our intellect ingulphs itself so far,
    That after it the memory cannot go.

Truly whatever of the holy realm
    I had the power to treasure in my mind
    Shall now become the subject of my song.

O good Apollo, for this last emprise
    Make of me such a vessel of thy power
    As giving the beloved laurel asks!

One summit of Parnassus hitherto
    Has been enough for me, but now with both
    I needs must enter the arena left.

Enter into my bosom, thou, and breathe
    As at the time when Marsyas thou didst draw
    Out of the scabbard of those limbs of his.

O power divine, lend’st thou thyself to me
    So that the shadow of the blessed realm
    Stamped in my brain I can make manifest,

Thou’lt see me come unto thy darling tree,
    And crown myself thereafter with those leaves
    Of which the theme and thou shall make me worthy.

So seldom, Father, do we gather them
    For triumph or of Caesar or of Poet,
    (The fault and shame of human inclinations,)

That the Peneian foliage should bring forth
    Joy to the joyous Delphic deity,
    When any one it makes to thirst for it.

A little spark is followed by great flame;
    Perchance with better voices after me
    Shall prayer be made that Cyrrha may respond!

To mortal men by passages diverse
    Uprises the world’s lamp; but by that one
    Which circles four uniteth with three crosses,

With better course and with a better star
    Conjoined it issues, and the mundane wax
    Tempers and stamps more after its own fashion.

Almost that passage had made morning there
    And evening here, and there was wholly white
    That hemisphere, and black the other part,

When Beatrice towards the left-hand side
    I saw turned round, and gazing at the sun;
    Never did eagle fasten so upon it!

And even as a second ray is wont
    To issue from the first and reascend,
    Like to a pilgrim who would fain return,

Thus of her action, through the eyes infused
    In my imagination, mine I made,
    And sunward fixed mine eyes beyond our wont.

There much is lawful which is here unlawful
    Unto our powers, by virtue of the place
    Made for the human species as its own.

Not long I bore it, nor so little while
    But I beheld it sparkle round about
    Like iron that comes molten from the fire;

And suddenly it seemed that day to day
    Was added, as if He who has the power
    Had with another sun the heaven adorned.

With eyes upon the everlasting wheels
    Stood Beatrice all intent, and I, on her
    Fixing my vision from above removed,

Such at her aspect inwardly became
    As Glaucus, tasting of the herb that made him
    Peer of the other gods beneath the sea.

To represent transhumanise in words
    Impossible were; the example, then, suffice
    Him for whom Grace the experience reserves.

If I was merely what of me thou newly
    Createdst, Love who governest the heaven,
    Thou knowest, who didst lift me with thy light!

When now the wheel, which thou dost make eternal
    Desiring thee, made me attentive to it
    By harmony thou dost modulate and measure,

Then seemed to me so much of heaven enkindled
    By the sun’s flame, that neither rain nor river
    E’er made a lake so widely spread abroad.

The newness of the sound and the great light
    Kindled in me a longing for their cause,
    Never before with such acuteness felt;

Whence she, who saw me as I saw myself,
    To quiet in me my perturbed mind,
    Opened her mouth, ere I did mine to ask,

And she began: “Thou makest thyself so dull
    With false imagining, that thou seest not
    What thou wouldst see if thou hadst shaken it off.

Thou art not upon earth, as thou believest;
    But lightning, fleeing its appropriate site,
    Ne’er ran as thou, who thitherward returnest.”

If of my former doubt I was divested
    By these brief little words more smiled than spoken,
    I in a new one was the more ensnared;

And said: “Already did I rest content
    From great amazement; but am now amazed
    In what way I transcend these bodies light.”

Whereupon she, after a pitying sigh,
    Her eyes directed tow’rds me with that look
    A mother casts on a delirious child;

And she began: “All things whate’er they be
    Have order among themselves, and this is form,
    That makes the universe resemble God.

Here do the higher creatures see the footprints
    Of the Eternal Power, which is the end
    Whereto is made the law already mentioned.

In the order that I speak of are inclined
    All natures, by their destinies diverse,
    More or less near unto their origin;

Hence they move onward unto ports diverse
    O’er the great sea of being; and each one
    With instinct given it which bears it on.

This bears away the fire towards the moon;
    This is in mortal hearts the motive power
    This binds together and unites the earth.

Nor only the created things that are
    Without intelligence this bow shoots forth,
    But those that have both intellect and love.

The Providence that regulates all this
    Makes with its light the heaven forever quiet,
    Wherein that turns which has the greatest haste.

And thither now, as to a site decreed,
    Bears us away the virtue of that cord
    Which aims its arrows at a joyous mark.

True is it, that as oftentimes the form
    Accords not with the intention of the art,
    Because in answering is matter deaf,

So likewise from this course doth deviate
    Sometimes the creature, who the power possesses,
    Though thus impelled, to swerve some other way,

(In the same wise as one may see the fire
    Fall from a cloud,) if the first impetus
    Earthward is wrested by some false delight.

Thou shouldst not wonder more, if well I judge,
    At thine ascent, than at a rivulet
    From some high mount descending to the lowland.

Marvel it would be in thee, if deprived
    Of hindrance, thou wert seated down below,
    As if on earth the living fire were quiet.”

Thereat she heavenward turned again her face.







O Ye, who in some pretty little boat,
    Eager to listen, have been following
    Behind my ship, that singing sails along,

Turn back to look again upon your shores;
    Do not put out to sea, lest peradventure,
    In losing me, you might yourselves be lost.

The sea I sail has never yet been passed;
    Minerva breathes, and pilots me Apollo,
    And Muses nine point out to me the Bears.

Ye other few who have the neck uplifted
    Betimes to th’ bread of Angels upon which
    One liveth here and grows not sated by it,

Well may you launch upon the deep salt-sea
    Your vessel, keeping still my wake before you
    Upon the water that grows smooth again.

Those glorious ones who unto Colchos passed
    Were not so wonder-struck as you shall be,
    When Jason they beheld a ploughman made!

The con-created and perpetual thirst
    For the realm deiform did bear us on,
    As swift almost as ye the heavens behold.

Upward gazed Beatrice, and I at her;
    And in such space perchance as strikes a bolt
    And flies, and from the notch unlocks itself,

Arrived I saw me where a wondrous thing
    Drew to itself my sight; and therefore she
    From whom no care of mine could be concealed,

Towards me turning, blithe as beautiful,
    Said unto me: “Fix gratefully thy mind
    On God, who unto the first star has brought us.”

It seemed to me a cloud encompassed us,
    Luminous, dense, consolidate and bright
    As adamant on which the sun is striking.

Into itself did the eternal pearl
    Receive us, even as water doth receive
    A ray of light, remaining still unbroken.

If I was body, (and we here conceive not
    How one dimension tolerates another,
    Which needs must be if body enter body,)

More the desire should be enkindled in us
    That essence to behold, wherein is seen
    How God and our own nature were united.

There will be seen what we receive by faith,
    Not demonstrated, but self-evident
    In guise of the first truth that man believes.

I made reply: “Madonna, as devoutly
    As most I can do I give thanks to Him
    Who has removed me from the mortal world.

But tell me what the dusky spots may be
    Upon this body, which below on earth
    Make people tell that fabulous tale of Cain?”

Somewhat she smiled; and then, “If the opinion
    Of mortals be erroneous,” she said,
    “Where’er the key of sense doth not unlock,

Certes, the shafts of wonder should not pierce thee
    Now, forasmuch as, following the senses,
    Thou seest that the reason has short wings.

But tell me what thou think’st of it thyself.”
    And I: “What seems to us up here diverse,
    Is caused, I think, by bodies rare and dense.”

And she: “Right truly shalt thou see immersed
    In error thy belief, if well thou hearest
    The argument that I shall make against it.

Lights many the eighth sphere displays to you
    Which in their quality and quantity
    May noted be of aspects different.

If this were caused by rare and dense alone,
    One only virtue would there be in all
    Or more or less diffused, or equally.

Virtues diverse must be perforce the fruits
    Of formal principles; and these, save one,
    Of course would by thy reasoning be destroyed.

Besides, if rarity were of this dimness
    The cause thou askest, either through and through
    This planet thus attenuate were of matter,

Or else, as in a body is apportioned
    The fat and lean, so in like manner this
    Would in its volume interchange the leaves.

Were it the former, in the sun’s eclipse
    It would be manifest by the shining through
    Of light, as through aught tenuous interfused.

This is not so; hence we must scan the other,
    And if it chance the other I demolish,
    Then falsified will thy opinion be.

But if this rarity go not through and through,
    There needs must be a limit, beyond which
    Its contrary prevents the further passing,

And thence the foreign radiance is reflected,
    Even as a colour cometh back from glass,
    The which behind itself concealeth lead.

Now thou wilt say the sunbeam shows itself
    More dimly there than in the other parts,
    By being there reflected farther back.

From this reply experiment will free thee
    If e’er thou try it, which is wont to be
    The fountain to the rivers of your arts.

Three mirrors shalt thou take, and two remove
    Alike from thee, the other more remote
    Between the former two shall meet thine eyes.

Turned towards these, cause that behind thy back
    Be placed a light, illuming the three mirrors
    And coming back to thee by all reflected.

Though in its quantity be not so ample
    The image most remote, there shalt thou see
    How it perforce is equally resplendent.

Now, as beneath the touches of warm rays
    Naked the subject of the snow remains
    Both of its former colour and its cold,

Thee thus remaining in thy intellect,
    Will I inform with such a living light,
    That it shall tremble in its aspect to thee.

Within the heaven of the divine repose
    Revolves a body, in whose virtue lies
    The being of whatever it contains.

The following heaven, that has so many eyes,
    Divides this being by essences diverse,
    Distinguished from it, and by it contained.

The other spheres, by various differences,
    All the distinctions which they have within them
    Dispose unto their ends and their effects.

Thus do these organs of the world proceed,
    As thou perceivest now, from grade to grade;
    Since from above they take, and act beneath.

Observe me well, how through this place I come
    Unto the truth thou wishest, that hereafter
    Thou mayst alone know how to keep the ford

The power and motion of the holy spheres,
    As from the artisan the hammer’s craft,
    Forth from the blessed motors must proceed.

The heaven, which lights so manifold make fair,
    From the Intelligence profound, which turns it,
    The image takes, and makes of it a seal.

And even as the soul within your dust
    Through members different and accommodated
    To faculties diverse expands itself,

So likewise this Intelligence diffuses
    Its virtue multiplied among the stars.
    Itself revolving on its unity.

Virtue diverse doth a diverse alloyage
    Make with the precious body that it quickens,
    In which, as life in you, it is combined.

From the glad nature whence it is derived,
    The mingled virtue through the body shines,
    Even as gladness through the living pupil.

From this proceeds whate’er from light to light
    Appeareth different, not from dense and rare:
    This is the formal principle that produces,

According to its goodness, dark and bright.”







That Sun, which erst with love my bosom warmed,
    Of beauteous truth had unto me discovered,
    By proving and reproving, the sweet aspect.

And, that I might confess myself convinced
    And confident, so far as was befitting,
    I lifted more erect my head to speak.

But there appeared a vision, which withdrew me
    So close to it, in order to be seen,
    That my confession I remembered not.

Such as through polished and transparent glass,
    Or waters crystalline and undisturbed,
    But not so deep as that their bed be lost,

Come back again the outlines of our faces
    So feeble, that a pearl on forehead white
    Comes not less speedily unto our eyes;

Such saw I many faces prompt to speak,
    So that I ran in error opposite
    To that which kindled love ’twixt man and fountain.

As soon as I became aware of them,
    Esteeming them as mirrored semblances,
    To see of whom they were, mine eyes I turned,

And nothing saw, and once more turned them forward
    Direct into the light of my sweet Guide,
    Who smiling kindled in her holy eyes.

“Marvel thou not,” she said to me, “because
    I smile at this thy puerile conceit,
    Since on the truth it trusts not yet its foot,

But turns thee, as ’tis wont, on emptiness.
    True substances are these which thou beholdest,
    Here relegate for breaking of some vow.

Therefore speak with them, listen and believe;
    For the true light, which giveth peace to them,
    Permits them not to turn from it their feet.”

And I unto the shade that seemed most wishful
    To speak directed me, and I began,
    As one whom too great eagerness bewilders:

“O well-created spirit, who in the rays
    Of life eternal dost the sweetness taste
    Which being untasted ne’er is comprehended,

Grateful ’twill be to me, if thou content me
    Both with thy name and with your destiny.”
    Whereat she promptly and with laughing eyes:

“Our charity doth never shut the doors
    Against a just desire, except as one
    Who wills that all her court be like herself.

I was a virgin sister in the world;
    And if thy mind doth contemplate me well,
    The being more fair will not conceal me from thee,

But thou shalt recognise I am Piccarda,
    Who, stationed here among these other blessed,
    Myself am blessed in the slowest sphere.

All our affections, that alone inflamed
    Are in the pleasure of the Holy Ghost,
    Rejoice at being of his order formed;

And this allotment, which appears so low,
    Therefore is given us, because our vows
    Have been neglected and in some part void.”

Whence I to her: “In your miraculous aspects
    There shines I know not what of the divine,
    Which doth transform you from our first conceptions.

Therefore I was not swift in my remembrance;
    But what thou tellest me now aids me so,
    That the refiguring is easier to me.

But tell me, ye who in this place are happy,
    Are you desirous of a higher place,
    To see more or to make yourselves more friends?”

First with those other shades she smiled a little;
    Thereafter answered me so full of gladness,
    She seemed to burn in the first fire of love:

“Brother, our will is quieted by virtue
    Of charity, that makes us wish alone
    For what we have, nor gives us thirst for more.

If to be more exalted we aspired,
    Discordant would our aspirations be
    Unto the will of Him who here secludes us;

Which thou shalt see finds no place in these circles,
    If being in charity is needful here,
    And if thou lookest well into its nature;

Nay, ’tis essential to this blest existence
    To keep itself within the will divine,
    Whereby our very wishes are made one;

So that, as we are station above station
    Throughout this realm, to all the realm ’tis pleasing,
    As to the King, who makes his will our will.

And his will is our peace; this is the sea
    To which is moving onward whatsoever
    It doth create, and all that nature makes.”

Then it was clear to me how everywhere
    In heaven is Paradise, although the grace
    Of good supreme there rain not in one measure.

But as it comes to pass, if one food sates,
    And for another still remains the longing,
    We ask for this, and that decline with thanks,

E’en thus did I; with gesture and with word,
    To learn from her what was the web wherein
    She did not ply the shuttle to the end.

“A perfect life and merit high in-heaven
    A lady o’er us,” said she, “by whose rule
    Down in your world they vest and veil themselves,

That until death they may both watch and sleep
    Beside that Spouse who every vow accepts
    Which charity conformeth to his pleasure.

To follow her, in girlhood from the world
    I fled, and in her habit shut myself,
    And pledged me to the pathway of her sect.

Then men accustomed unto evil more
    Than unto good, from the sweet cloister tore me;
    God knows what afterward my life became.

This other splendour, which to thee reveals
    Itself on my right side, and is enkindled
    With all the illumination of our sphere,

What of myself I say applies to her;
    A nun was she, and likewise from her head
    Was ta’en the shadow of the sacred wimple.

But when she too was to the world returned
    Against her wishes and against good usage,
    Of the heart’s veil she never was divested.

Of great Costanza this is the effulgence,
    Who from the second wind of Suabia
    Brought forth the third and latest puissance.”

Thus unto me she spake, and then began
    “Ave Maria” singing, and in singing
    Vanished, as through deep water something heavy.

My sight, that followed her as long a time
    As it was possible, when it had lost her
    Turned round unto the mark of more desire,

And wholly unto Beatrice reverted;
    But she such lightnings flashed into mine eyes,
    That at the first my sight endured it not;

And this in questioning more backward made me.







Between two viands, equally removed
    And tempting, a free man would die of hunger
    Ere either he could bring unto his teeth.

So would a lamb between the ravenings
    Of two fierce wolves stand fearing both alike;
    And so would stand a dog between two does.

Hence, if I held my peace, myself I blame not,
    Impelled in equal measure by my doubts,
    Since it must be so, nor do I commend.

I held my peace; but my desire was painted
    Upon my face, and questioning with that
    More fervent far than by articulate speech.

Beatrice did as Daniel had done
    Relieving Nebuchadnezzar from the wrath
    Which rendered him unjustly merciless,

And said: “Well see I how attracteth thee
    One and the other wish, so that thy care
    Binds itself so that forth it does not breathe.

Thou arguest, if good will be permanent,
    The violence of others, for what reason
    Doth it decrease the measure of my merit?

Again for doubting furnish thee occasion
    Souls seeming to return unto the stars,
    According to the sentiment of Plato.

These are the questions which upon thy wish
    Are thrusting equally; and therefore first
    Will I treat that which hath the most of gall.

He of the Seraphim most absorbed in God,
    Moses, and Samuel, and whichever John
    Thou mayst select, I say, and even Mary,

Have not in any other heaven their seats,
    Than have those spirits that just appeared to thee,
    Nor of existence more or fewer years;

But all make beautiful the primal circle,
    And have sweet life in different degrees,
    By feeling more or less the eternal breath.

They showed themselves here, not because allotted
    This sphere has been to them, but to give sign
    Of the celestial which is least exalted.

To speak thus is adapted to your mind,
    Since only through the sense it apprehendeth
    What then it worthy makes of intellect.

On this account the Scripture condescends
    Unto your faculties, and feet and hands
    To God attributes, and means something else;

And Holy Church under an aspect human
    Gabriel and Michael represent to you,
    And him who made Tobias whole again.

That which Timaeus argues of the soul
    Doth not resemble that which here is seen,
    Because it seems that as he speaks he thinks.

He says the soul unto its star returns,
    Believing it to have been severed thence
    Whenever nature gave it as a form.

Perhaps his doctrine is of other guise
    Than the words sound, and possibly may be
    With meaning that is not to be derided.

If he doth mean that to these wheels return
    The honour of their influence and the blame,
    Perhaps his bow doth hit upon some truth.

This principle ill understood once warped
    The whole world nearly, till it went astray
    Invoking Jove and Mercury and Mars.

The other doubt which doth disquiet thee
    Less venom has, for its malevolence
    Could never lead thee otherwhere from me.

That as unjust our justice should appear
    In eyes of mortals, is an argument
    Of faith, and not of sin heretical.

But still, that your perception may be able
    To thoroughly penetrate this verity,
    As thou desirest, I will satisfy thee.

If it be violence when he who suffers
    Co-operates not with him who uses force,
    These souls were not on that account excused;

For will is never quenched unless it will,
    But operates as nature doth in fire
    If violence a thousand times distort it.

Hence, if it yieldeth more or less, it seconds
    The force; and these have done so, having power
    Of turning back unto the holy place.

If their will had been perfect, like to that
    Which Lawrence fast upon his gridiron held,
    And Mutius made severe to his own hand,

It would have urged them back along the road
    Whence they were dragged, as soon as they were free;
    But such a solid will is all too rare.

And by these words, if thou hast gathered them
    As thou shouldst do, the argument is refuted
    That would have still annoyed thee many times.

But now another passage runs across
    Before thine eyes, and such that by thyself
    Thou couldst not thread it ere thou wouldst be weary.

I have for certain put into thy mind
    That soul beatified could never lie,
    For it is near the primal Truth,

And then thou from Piccarda might’st have heard
    Costanza kept affection for the veil,
    So that she seemeth here to contradict me.

Many times, brother, has it come to pass,
    That, to escape from peril, with reluctance
    That has been done it was not right to do,

E’en as Alcmaeon (who, being by his father
    Thereto entreated, his own mother slew)
    Not to lose pity pitiless became.

At this point I desire thee to remember
    That force with will commingles, and they cause
    That the offences cannot be excused.

Will absolute consenteth not to evil;
    But in so far consenteth as it fears,
    If it refrain, to fall into more harm.

Hence when Piccarda uses this expression,
    She meaneth the will absolute, and I
    The other, so that both of us speak truth.”

Such was the flowing of the holy river
    That issued from the fount whence springs all truth;
    This put to rest my wishes one and all.

“O love of the first lover, O divine,”
    Said I forthwith, “whose speech inundates me
    And warms me so, it more and more revives me,

My own affection is not so profound
    As to suffice in rendering grace for grace;
    Let Him, who sees and can, thereto respond.

Well I perceive that never sated is
    Our intellect unless the Truth illume it,
    Beyond which nothing true expands itself.

It rests therein, as wild beast in his lair,
    When it attains it; and it can attain it;
    If not, then each desire would frustrate be.

Therefore springs up, in fashion of a shoot,
    Doubt at the foot of truth; and this is nature,
    Which to the top from height to height impels us.

This doth invite me, this assurance give me
    With reverence, Lady, to inquire of you
    Another truth, which is obscure to me.

I wish to know if man can satisfy you
    For broken vows with other good deeds, so
    That in your balance they will not be light.”

Beatrice gazed upon me with her eyes
    Full of the sparks of love, and so divine,
    That, overcome my power, I turned my back

And almost lost myself with eyes downcast.







“If in the heat of love I flame upon thee
    Beyond the measure that on earth is seen,
    So that the valour of thine eyes I vanquish,

Marvel thou not thereat; for this proceeds
    From perfect sight, which as it apprehends
    To the good apprehended moves its feet.

Well I perceive how is already shining
    Into thine intellect the eternal light,
    That only seen enkindles always love;

And if some other thing your love seduce,
    ’Tis nothing but a vestige of the same,
    Ill understood, which there is shining through.

Thou fain wouldst know if with another service
    For broken vow can such return be made
    As to secure the soul from further claim.”

This Canto thus did Beatrice begin;
    And, as a man who breaks not off his speech,
    Continued thus her holy argument:

“The greatest gift that in his largess God
    Creating made, and unto his own goodness
    Nearest conformed, and that which he doth prize

Most highly, is the freedom of the will,
    Wherewith the creatures of intelligence
    Both all and only were and are endowed.

Now wilt thou see, if thence thou reasonest,
    The high worth of a vow, if it he made
    So that when thou consentest God consents:

For, closing between God and man the compact,
    A sacrifice is of this treasure made,
    Such as I say, and made by its own act.

What can be rendered then as compensation?
    Think’st thou to make good use of what thou’st offered,
    With gains ill gotten thou wouldst do good deed.

Now art thou certain of the greater point;
    But because Holy Church in this dispenses,
    Which seems against the truth which I have shown thee,

Behoves thee still to sit awhile at table,
    Because the solid food which thou hast taken
    Requireth further aid for thy digestion.

Open thy mind to that which I reveal,
    And fix it there within; for ’tis not knowledge,
    The having heard without retaining it.

In the essence of this sacrifice two things
    Convene together; and the one is that
    Of which ’tis made, the other is the agreement.

This last for evermore is cancelled not
    Unless complied with, and concerning this
    With such precision has above been spoken.

Therefore it was enjoined upon the Hebrews
    To offer still, though sometimes what was offered
    Might be commuted, as thou ought’st to know.

The other, which is known to thee as matter,
    May well indeed be such that one errs not
    If it for other matter be exchanged.

But let none shift the burden on his shoulder
    At his arbitrament, without the turning
    Both of the white and of the yellow key;

And every permutation deem as foolish,
    If in the substitute the thing relinquished,
    As the four is in six, be not contained.

Therefore whatever thing has so great weight
    In value that it drags down every balance,
    Cannot be satisfied with other spending.

Let mortals never take a vow in jest;
    Be faithful and not blind in doing that,
    As Jephthah was in his first offering,

Whom more beseemed to say, ‘I have done wrong,
    Than to do worse by keeping; and as foolish
    Thou the great leader of the Greeks wilt find,

Whence wept Iphigenia her fair face,
    And made for her both wise and simple weep,
    Who heard such kind of worship spoken of.’

Christians, be ye more serious in your movements;
    Be ye not like a feather at each wind,
    And think not every water washes you.

Ye have the Old and the New Testament,
    And the Pastor of the Church who guideth you
    Let this suffice you unto your salvation.

If evil appetite cry aught else to you,
    Be ye as men, and not as silly sheep,
    So that the Jew among you may not mock you.

Be ye not as the lamb that doth abandon
    Its mother’s milk, and frolicsome and simple
    Combats at its own pleasure with itself.”

Thus Beatrice to me even as I write it;
    Then all desireful turned herself again
    To that part where the world is most alive.

Her silence and her change of countenance
    Silence imposed upon my eager mind,
    That had already in advance new questions;

And as an arrow that upon the mark
    Strikes ere the bowstring quiet hath become,
    So did we speed into the second realm.

My Lady there so joyful I beheld,
    As into the brightness of that heaven she entered,
    More luminous thereat the planet grew;

And if the star itself was changed and smiled,
    What became I, who by my nature am
    Exceeding mutable in every guise!

As, in a fish-pond which is pure and tranquil,
    The fishes draw to that which from without
    Comes in such fashion that their food they deem it;

So I beheld more than a thousand splendours
    Drawing towards us, and in each was heard:
    “Lo, this is she who shall increase our love.”

And as each one was coming unto us,
    Full of beatitude the shade was seen,
    By the effulgence clear that issued from it.

Think, Reader, if what here is just beginning
    No farther should proceed, how thou wouldst have
    An agonizing need of knowing more;

And of thyself thou’lt see how I from these
    Was in desire of hearing their conditions,
    As they unto mine eyes were manifest.

“O thou well-born, unto whom Grace concedes
    To see the thrones of the eternal triumph,
    Or ever yet the warfare be abandoned

With light that through the whole of heaven is spread
    Kindled are we, and hence if thou desirest
    To know of us, at thine own pleasure sate thee.”

Thus by some one among those holy spirits
    Was spoken, and by Beatrice: “Speak, speak
    Securely, and believe them even as Gods.”

“Well I perceive how thou dost nest thyself
    In thine own light, and drawest it from thine eyes,
    Because they coruscate when thou dost smile,

But know not who thou art, nor why thou hast,
    Spirit august, thy station in the sphere
    That veils itself to men in alien rays.”

This said I in direction of the light
    Which first had spoken to me; whence it became
    By far more lucent than it was before.

Even as the sun, that doth conceal himself
    By too much light, when heat has worn away
    The tempering influence of the vapours dense,

By greater rapture thus concealed itself
    In its own radiance the figure saintly,
    And thus close, close enfolded answered me

In fashion as the following Canto sings.






“After that Constantine the eagle turned
    Against the course of heaven, which it had followed
    Behind the ancient who Lavinia took,

Two hundred years and more the bird of God
    In the extreme of Europe held itself,
    Near to the mountains whence it issued first;

And under shadow of the sacred plumes
    It governed there the world from hand to hand,
    And, changing thus, upon mine own alighted.

Caesar I was, and am Justinian,
    Who, by the will of primal Love I feel,
    Took from the laws the useless and redundant;

And ere unto the work I was attent,
    One nature to exist in Christ, not more,
    Believed, and with such faith was I contented.

But blessed Agapetus, he who was
    The supreme pastor, to the faith sincere
    Pointed me out the way by words of his.

Him I believed, and what was his assertion
    I now see clearly, even as thou seest
    Each contradiction to be false and true.

As soon as with the Church I moved my feet,
    God in his grace it pleased with this high task
    To inspire me, and I gave me wholly to it,

And to my Belisarius I commended
    The arms, to which was heaven’s right hand so joined
    It was a signal that I should repose.

Now here to the first question terminates
    My answer; but the character thereof
    Constrains me to continue with a sequel,

In order that thou see with how great reason
    Men move against the standard sacrosanct,
    Both who appropriate and who oppose it.

Behold how great a power has made it worthy
    Of reverence, beginning from the hour
    When Pallas died to give it sovereignty.

Thou knowest it made in Alba its abode
    Three hundred years and upward, till at last
    The three to three fought for it yet again.

Thou knowest what it achieved from Sabine wrong
    Down to Lucretia’s sorrow, in seven kings
    O’ercoming round about the neighboring nations;

Thou knowest what it achieved, borne by the Romans
    Illustrious against Brennus, against Pyrrhus,
    Against the other princes and confederates.

Torquatus thence and Quinctius, who from locks
    Unkempt was named, Decii and Fabii,
    Received the fame I willingly embalm;

It struck to earth the pride of the Arabians,
    Who, following Hannibal, had passed across
    The Alpine ridges, Po, from which thou glidest;

Beneath it triumphed while they yet were young
    Pompey and Scipio, and to the hill
    Beneath which thou wast born it bitter seemed;

Then, near unto the time when heaven had willed
    To bring the whole world to its mood serene,
    Did Caesar by the will of Rome assume it.

What it achieved from Var unto the Rhine,
    Isere beheld and Saone, beheld the Seine,
    And every valley whence the Rhone is filled;

What it achieved when it had left Ravenna,
    And leaped the Rubicon, was such a flight
    That neither tongue nor pen could follow it.

Round towards Spain it wheeled its legions; then
    Towards Durazzo, and Pharsalia smote
    That to the calid Nile was felt the pain.

Antandros and the Simois, whence it started,
    It saw again, and there where Hector lies,
    And ill for Ptolemy then roused itself.

From thence it came like lightning upon Juba;
    Then wheeled itself again into your West,
    Where the Pompeian clarion it heard.

From what it wrought with the next standard-bearer
    Brutus and Cassius howl in Hell together,
    And Modena and Perugia dolent were;

Still doth the mournful Cleopatra weep
    Because thereof, who, fleeing from before it,
    Took from the adder sudden and black death.

With him it ran even to the Red Sea shore;
    With him it placed the world in so great peace,
    That unto Janus was his temple closed.

But what the standard that has made me speak
    Achieved before, and after should achieve
    Throughout the mortal realm that lies beneath it,

Becometh in appearance mean and dim,
    If in the hand of the third Caesar seen
    With eye unclouded and affection pure,

Because the living Justice that inspires me
    Granted it, in the hand of him I speak of,
    The glory of doing vengeance for its wrath.

Now here attend to what I answer thee;
    Later it ran with Titus to do vengeance
    Upon the vengeance of the ancient sin.

And when the tooth of Lombardy had bitten
    The Holy Church, then underneath its wings
    Did Charlemagne victorious succor her.

Now hast thou power to judge of such as those
    Whom I accused above, and of their crimes,
    Which are the cause of all your miseries.

To the public standard one the yellow lilies
    Opposes, the other claims it for a party,
    So that ’tis hard to see which sins the most.

Let, let the Ghibellines ply their handicraft
    Beneath some other standard; for this ever
    Ill follows he who it and justice parts.

And let not this new Charles e’er strike it down,
    He and his Guelfs, but let him fear the talons
    That from a nobler lion stripped the fell.

Already oftentimes the sons have wept
    The father’s crime; and let him not believe
    That God will change His scutcheon for the lilies.

This little planet doth adorn itself
    With the good spirits that have active been,
    That fame and honour might come after them;

And whensoever the desires mount thither,
    Thus deviating, must perforce the rays
    Of the true love less vividly mount upward.

But in commensuration of our wages
    With our desert is portion of our joy,
    Because we see them neither less nor greater.

Herein doth living Justice sweeten so
    Affection in us, that for evermore
    It cannot warp to any iniquity.

Voices diverse make up sweet melodies;
    So in this life of ours the seats diverse
    Render sweet harmony among these spheres;

And in the compass of this present pearl
    Shineth the sheen of Romeo, of whom
    The grand and beauteous work was ill rewarded.

But the Provencals who against him wrought,
    They have not laughed, and therefore ill goes he
    Who makes his hurt of the good deeds of others.

Four daughters, and each one of them a queen,
    Had Raymond Berenger, and this for him
    Did Romeo, a poor man and a pilgrim;

And then malicious words incited him
    To summon to a reckoning this just man,
    Who rendered to him seven and five for ten.

Then he departed poor and stricken in years,
    And if the world could know the heart he had,
    In begging bit by bit his livelihood,

Though much it laud him, it would laud him more.”







“Osanna sanctus Deus Sabaoth,
    Superillustrans claritate tua
    Felices ignes horum malahoth!”

In this wise, to his melody returning,
    This substance, upon which a double light
    Doubles itself, was seen by me to sing,

And to their dance this and the others moved,
    And in the manner of swift-hurrying sparks
    Veiled themselves from me with a sudden distance.

Doubting was I, and saying, “Tell her, tell her,”
    Within me, “tell her,” saying, “tell my Lady,”
    Who slakes my thirst with her sweet effluences;

And yet that reverence which doth lord it over
    The whole of me only by B and ICE,
    Bowed me again like unto one who drowses.

Short while did Beatrice endure me thus;
    And she began, lighting me with a smile
    Such as would make one happy in the fire:

“According to infallible advisement,
    After what manner a just vengeance justly
    Could be avenged has put thee upon thinking,

But I will speedily thy mind unloose;
    And do thou listen, for these words of mine
    Of a great doctrine will a present make thee.

By not enduring on the power that wills
    Curb for his good, that man who ne’er was born,
    Damning himself damned all his progeny;

Whereby the human species down below
    Lay sick for many centuries in great error,
    Till to descend it pleased the Word of God

To where the nature, which from its own Maker
    Estranged itself, he joined to him in person
    By the sole act of his eternal love.

Now unto what is said direct thy sight;
    This nature when united to its Maker,
    Such as created, was sincere and good;

But by itself alone was banished forth
    From Paradise, because it turned aside
    Out of the way of truth and of its life.

Therefore the penalty the cross held out,
    If measured by the nature thus assumed,
    None ever yet with so great justice stung,

And none was ever of so great injustice,
    Considering who the Person was that suffered,
    Within whom such a nature was contracted.

From one act therefore issued things diverse;
    To God and to the Jews one death was pleasing;
    Earth trembled at it and the Heaven was opened.

It should no longer now seem difficult
    To thee, when it is said that a just vengeance
    By a just court was afterward avenged.

But now do I behold thy mind entangled
    From thought to thought within a knot, from which
    With great desire it waits to free itself.

Thou sayest, ‘Well discern I what I hear;
    But it is hidden from me why God willed
    For our redemption only this one mode.’

Buried remaineth, brother, this decree
    Unto the eyes of every one whose nature
    Is in the flame of love not yet adult.

Verily, inasmuch as at this mark
    One gazes long and little is discerned,
    Wherefore this mode was worthiest will I say.

Goodness Divine, which from itself doth spurn
    All envy, burning in itself so sparkles
    That the eternal beauties it unfolds.

Whate’er from this immediately distils
    Has afterwards no end, for ne’er removed
    Is its impression when it sets its seal.

Whate’er from this immediately rains down
    Is wholly free, because it is not subject
    Unto the influences of novel things.

The more conformed thereto, the more it pleases;
    For the blest ardour that irradiates all things
    In that most like itself is most vivacious.

With all of these things has advantaged been
    The human creature; and if one be wanting,
    From his nobility he needs must fall.

’Tis sin alone which doth disfranchise him,
    And render him unlike the Good Supreme,
    So that he little with its light is blanched,

And to his dignity no more returns,
    Unless he fill up where transgression empties
    With righteous pains for criminal delights.

Your nature when it sinned so utterly
    In its own seed, out of these dignities
    Even as out of Paradise was driven,

Nor could itself recover, if thou notest
    With nicest subtilty, by any way,
    Except by passing one of these two fords:

Either that God through clemency alone
    Had pardon granted, or that man himself
    Had satisfaction for his folly made.

Fix now thine eye deep into the abyss
    Of the eternal counsel, to my speech
    As far as may be fastened steadfastly!

Man in his limitations had not power
    To satisfy, not having power to sink
    In his humility obeying then,

Far as he disobeying thought to rise;
    And for this reason man has been from power
    Of satisfying by himself excluded.

Therefore it God behoved in his own ways
    Man to restore unto his perfect life,
    I say in one, or else in both of them.

But since the action of the doer is
    So much more grateful, as it more presents
    The goodness of the heart from which it issues,

Goodness Divine, that doth imprint the world,
    Has been contented to proceed by each
    And all its ways to lift you up again;

Nor ’twixt the first day and the final night
    Such high and such magnificent proceeding
    By one or by the other was or shall be;

For God more bounteous was himself to give
    To make man able to uplift himself,
    Than if he only of himself had pardoned;

And all the other modes were insufficient
    For justice, were it not the Son of God
    Himself had humbled to become incarnate.

Now, to fill fully each desire of thine,
    Return I to elucidate one place,
    In order that thou there mayst see as I do.

Thou sayst: ‘I see the air, I see the fire,
    The water, and the earth, and all their mixtures
    Come to corruption, and short while endure;

And these things notwithstanding were created;’
    Therefore if that which I have said were true,
    They should have been secure against corruption.

The Angels, brother, and the land sincere
    In which thou art, created may be called
    Just as they are in their entire existence;

But all the elements which thou hast named,
    And all those things which out of them are made,
    By a created virtue are informed.

Created was the matter which they have;
    Created was the informing influence
    Within these stars that round about them go.

The soul of every brute and of the plants
    By its potential temperament attracts
    The ray and motion of the holy lights;

But your own life immediately inspires
    Supreme Beneficence, and enamours it
    So with herself, it evermore desires her.

And thou from this mayst argue furthermore
    Your resurrection, if thou think again
    How human flesh was fashioned at that time

When the first parents both of them were made.”







The world used in its peril to believe
    That the fair Cypria delirious love
    Rayed out, in the third epicycle turning;

Wherefore not only unto her paid honour
    Of sacrifices and of votive cry
    The ancient nations in the ancient error,

But both Dione honoured they and Cupid,
    That as her mother, this one as her son,
    And said that he had sat in Dido’s lap;

And they from her, whence I beginning take,
    Took the denomination of the star
    That woos the sun, now following, now in front.

I was not ware of our ascending to it;
    But of our being in it gave full faith
    My Lady whom I saw more beauteous grow.

And as within a flame a spark is seen,
    And as within a voice a voice discerned,
    When one is steadfast, and one comes and goes,

Within that light beheld I other lamps
    Move in a circle, speeding more and less,
    Methinks in measure of their inward vision.

From a cold cloud descended never winds,
    Or visible or not, so rapidly
    They would not laggard and impeded seem

To any one who had those lights divine
    Seen come towards us, leaving the gyration
    Begun at first in the high Seraphim.

And behind those that most in front appeared
    Sounded “Osanna!” so that never since
    To hear again was I without desire.

Then unto us more nearly one approached,
    And it alone began: “We all are ready
    Unto thy pleasure, that thou joy in us.

We turn around with the celestial Princes,
    One gyre and one gyration and one thirst,
    To whom thou in the world of old didst say,

‘Ye who, intelligent, the third heaven are moving;’
    And are so full of love, to pleasure thee
    A little quiet will not be less sweet.”

After these eyes of mine themselves had offered
    Unto my Lady reverently, and she
    Content and certain of herself had made them,

Back to the light they turned, which so great promise
    Made of itself, and “Say, who art thou?” was
    My voice, imprinted with a great affection.

O how and how much I beheld it grow
    With the new joy that superadded was
    Unto its joys, as soon as I had spoken!

Thus changed, it said to me: “The world possessed me
    Short time below; and, if it had been more,
    Much evil will be which would not have been.

My gladness keepeth me concealed from thee,
    Which rayeth round about me, and doth hide me
    Like as a creature swathed in its own silk.

Much didst thou love me, and thou hadst good reason;
    For had I been below, I should have shown thee
    Somewhat beyond the foliage of my love.

That left-hand margin, which doth bathe itself
    In Rhone, when it is mingled with the Sorgue,
    Me for its lord awaited in due time,

And that horn of Ausonia, which is towned
    With Bari, with Gaeta and Catona,
    Whence Tronto and Verde in the sea disgorge.

Already flashed upon my brow the crown
    Of that dominion which the Danube waters
    After the German borders it abandons;

And beautiful Trinacria, that is murky
    ’Twixt Pachino and Peloro, (on the gulf
    Which greatest scath from Eurus doth receive,)

Not through Typhoeus, but through nascent sulphur,
    Would have awaited her own monarchs still,
    Through me from Charles descended and from Rudolph,

If evil lordship, that exasperates ever
    The subject populations, had not moved
    Palermo to the outcry of ‘Death! death!’

And if my brother could but this foresee,
    The greedy poverty of Catalonia
    Straight would he flee, that it might not molest him;

For verily ’tis needful to provide,
    Through him or other, so that on his bark
    Already freighted no more freight be placed.

His nature, which from liberal covetous
    Descended, such a soldiery would need
    As should not care for hoarding in a chest.”

“Because I do believe the lofty joy
    Thy speech infuses into me, my Lord,
    Where every good thing doth begin and end

Thou seest as I see it, the more grateful
    Is it to me; and this too hold I dear,
    That gazing upon God thou dost discern it.

Glad hast thou made me; so make clear to me,
    Since speaking thou hast stirred me up to doubt,
    How from sweet seed can bitter issue forth.”

This I to him; and he to me: “If I
    Can show to thee a truth, to what thou askest
    Thy face thou’lt hold as thou dost hold thy back.

The Good which all the realm thou art ascending
    Turns and contents, maketh its providence
    To be a power within these bodies vast;

And not alone the natures are foreseen
    Within the mind that in itself is perfect,
    But they together with their preservation.

For whatsoever thing this bow shoots forth
    Falls foreordained unto an end foreseen,
    Even as a shaft directed to its mark.

If that were not, the heaven which thou dost walk
    Would in such manner its effects produce,
    That they no longer would be arts, but ruins.

This cannot be, if the Intelligences
    That keep these stars in motion are not maimed,
    And maimed the First that has not made them perfect.

Wilt thou this truth have clearer made to thee?”
    And I: “Not so; for ’tis impossible
    That nature tire, I see, in what is needful.”

Whence he again: “Now say, would it be worse
    For men on earth were they not citizens?”
    “Yes,” I replied; “and here I ask no reason.”

“And can they be so, if below they live not
    Diversely unto offices diverse?
    No, if your master writeth well for you.”

So came he with deductions to this point;
    Then he concluded: “Therefore it behoves
    The roots of your effects to be diverse.

Hence one is Solon born, another Xerxes,
    Another Melchisedec, and another he
    Who, flying through the air, his son did lose.

Revolving Nature, which a signet is
    To mortal wax, doth practise well her art,
    But not one inn distinguish from another;

Thence happens it that Esau differeth
    In seed from Jacob; and Quirinus comes
    From sire so vile that he is given to Mars.

A generated nature its own way
    Would always make like its progenitors,
    If Providence divine were not triumphant.

Now that which was behind thee is before thee;
    But that thou know that I with thee am pleased,
    With a corollary will I mantle thee.

Evermore nature, if it fortune find
    Discordant to it, like each other seed
    Out of its region, maketh evil thrift;

And if the world below would fix its mind
    On the foundation which is laid by nature,
    Pursuing that, ’twould have the people good.

But you unto religion wrench aside
    Him who was born to gird him with the sword,
    And make a king of him who is for sermons;

Therefore your footsteps wander from the road.”






Beautiful Clemence, after that thy Charles
    Had me enlightened, he narrated to me
    The treacheries his seed should undergo;

But said: “Be still and let the years roll round;”
    So I can only say, that lamentation
    Legitimate shall follow on your wrongs.

And of that holy light the life already
    Had to the Sun which fills it turned again,
    As to that good which for each thing sufficeth.

Ah, souls deceived, and creatures impious,
    Who from such good do turn away your hearts,
    Directing upon vanity your foreheads!

And now, behold, another of those splendours
    Approached me, and its will to pleasure me
    It signified by brightening outwardly.

The eyes of Beatrice, that fastened were
    Upon me, as before, of dear assent
    To my desire assurance gave to me.

“Ah, bring swift compensation to my wish,
    Thou blessed spirit,” I said, “and give me proof
    That what I think in thee I can reflect!”

Whereat the light, that still was new to me,
    Out of its depths, whence it before was singing,
    As one delighted to do good, continued:

“Within that region of the land depraved
    Of Italy, that lies between Rialto
    And fountain-heads of Brenta and of Piava,

Rises a hill, and mounts not very high,
    Wherefrom descended formerly a torch
    That made upon that region great assault.

Out of one root were born both I and it;
    Cunizza was I called, and here I shine
    Because the splendour of this star o’ercame me.

But gladly to myself the cause I pardon
    Of my allotment, and it does not grieve me;
    Which would perhaps seem strong unto your vulgar.

Of this so luculent and precious jewel,
    Which of our heaven is nearest unto me,
    Great fame remained; and ere it die away

This hundredth year shall yet quintupled be.
    See if man ought to make him excellent,
    So that another life the first may leave!

And thus thinks not the present multitude
    Shut in by Adige and Tagliamento,
    Nor yet for being scourged is penitent.

But soon ’twill be that Padua in the marsh
    Will change the water that Vicenza bathes,
    Because the folk are stubborn against duty;

And where the Sile and Cagnano join
    One lordeth it, and goes with lofty head,
    For catching whom e’en now the net is making.

Feltro moreover of her impious pastor
    Shall weep the crime, which shall so monstrous be
    That for the like none ever entered Malta.

Ample exceedingly would be the vat
    That of the Ferrarese could hold the blood,
    And weary who should weigh it ounce by ounce,

Of which this courteous priest shall make a gift
    To show himself a partisan; and such gifts
    Will to the living of the land conform.

Above us there are mirrors, Thrones you call them,
    From which shines out on us God Judicant,
    So that this utterance seems good to us.”

Here it was silent, and it had the semblance
    Of being turned elsewhither, by the wheel
    On which it entered as it was before.

The other joy, already known to me,
    Became a thing transplendent in my sight,
    As a fine ruby smitten by the sun.

Through joy effulgence is acquired above,
    As here a smile; but down below, the shade
    Outwardly darkens, as the mind is sad.

“God seeth all things, and in Him, blest spirit,
    Thy sight is,” said I, “so that never will
    Of his can possibly from thee be hidden;

Thy voice, then, that for ever makes the heavens
    Glad, with the singing of those holy fires
    Which of their six wings make themselves a cowl,

Wherefore does it not satisfy my longings?
    Indeed, I would not wait thy questioning
    If I in thee were as thou art in me.”

“The greatest of the valleys where the water
    Expands itself,” forthwith its words began,
    “That sea excepted which the earth engarlands,

Between discordant shores against the sun
    Extends so far, that it meridian makes
    Where it was wont before to make the horizon.

I was a dweller on that valley’s shore
    ’Twixt Ebro and Magra that with journey short
    Doth from the Tuscan part the Genoese.

With the same sunset and same sunrise nearly
    Sit Buggia and the city whence I was,
    That with its blood once made the harbour hot.

Folco that people called me unto whom
    My name was known; and now with me this heaven
    Imprints itself, as I did once with it;

For more the daughter of Belus never burned,
    Offending both Sichaeus and Creusa,
    Than I, so long as it became my locks,

Nor yet that Rodophean, who deluded
    was by Demophoon, nor yet Alcides,
    When Iole he in his heart had locked.

Yet here is no repenting, but we smile,
    Not at the fault, which comes not back to mind,
    But at the power which ordered and foresaw.

Here we behold the art that doth adorn
    With such affection, and the good discover
    Whereby the world above turns that below.

But that thou wholly satisfied mayst bear
    Thy wishes hence which in this sphere are born,
    Still farther to proceed behoveth me.

Thou fain wouldst know who is within this light
    That here beside me thus is scintillating,
    Even as a sunbeam in the limpid water.

Then know thou, that within there is at rest
    Rahab, and being to our order joined,
    With her in its supremest grade ’tis sealed.

Into this heaven, where ends the shadowy cone
    Cast by your world, before all other souls
    First of Christ’s triumph was she taken up.

Full meet it was to leave her in some heaven,
    Even as a palm of the high victory
    Which he acquired with one palm and the other,

Because she favoured the first glorious deed
    Of Joshua upon the Holy Land,
    That little stirs the memory of the Pope.

Thy city, which an offshoot is of him
    Who first upon his Maker turned his back,
    And whose ambition is so sorely wept,

Brings forth and scatters the accursed flower
    Which both the sheep and lambs hath led astray
    Since it has turned the shepherd to a wolf.

For this the Evangel and the mighty Doctors
    Are derelict, and only the Decretals
    So studied that it shows upon their margins.

On this are Pope and Cardinals intent;
    Their meditations reach not Nazareth,
    There where his pinions Gabriel unfolded;

But Vatican and the other parts elect
    Of Rome, which have a cemetery been
    Unto the soldiery that followed Peter

Shall soon be free from this adultery.”







Looking into his Son with all the Love
    Which each of them eternally breathes forth,
    The Primal and unutterable Power

Whate’er before the mind or eye revolves
    With so much order made, there can be none
    Who this beholds without enjoying Him.

Lift up then, Reader, to the lofty wheels
    With me thy vision straight unto that part
    Where the one motion on the other strikes,

And there begin to contemplate with joy
    That Master’s art, who in himself so loves it
    That never doth his eye depart therefrom.

Behold how from that point goes branching off
    The oblique circle, which conveys the planets,
    To satisfy the world that calls upon them;

And if their pathway were not thus inflected,
    Much virtue in the heavens would be in vain,
    And almost every power below here dead.

If from the straight line distant more or less
    Were the departure, much would wanting be
    Above and underneath of mundane order.

Remain now, Reader, still upon thy bench,
    In thought pursuing that which is foretasted,
    If thou wouldst jocund be instead of weary.

I’ve set before thee; henceforth feed thyself,
    For to itself diverteth all my care
    That theme whereof I have been made the scribe.

The greatest of the ministers of nature,
    Who with the power of heaven the world imprints
    And measures with his light the time for us,

With that part which above is called to mind
    Conjoined, along the spirals was revolving,
    Where each time earlier he presents himself;

And I was with him; but of the ascending
    I was not conscious, saving as a man
    Of a first thought is conscious ere it come;

And Beatrice, she who is seen to pass
    From good to better, and so suddenly
    That not by time her action is expressed,

How lucent in herself must she have been!
    And what was in the sun, wherein I entered,
    Apparent not by colour but by light,

I, though I call on genius, art, and practice,
    Cannot so tell that it could be imagined;
    Believe one can, and let him long to see it.

And if our fantasies too lowly are
    For altitude so great, it is no marvel,
    Since o’er the sun was never eye could go.

Such in this place was the fourth family
    Of the high Father, who forever sates it,
    Showing how he breathes forth and how begets.

And Beatrice began: “Give thanks, give thanks
    Unto the Sun of Angels, who to this
    Sensible one has raised thee by his grace!”

Never was heart of mortal so disposed
    To worship, nor to give itself to God
    With all its gratitude was it so ready,

As at those words did I myself become;
    And all my love was so absorbed in Him,
    That in oblivion Beatrice was eclipsed.

Nor this displeased her; but she smiled at it
    So that the splendour of her laughing eyes
    My single mind on many things divided.

Lights many saw I, vivid and triumphant,
    Make us a centre and themselves a circle,
    More sweet in voice than luminous in aspect.

Thus girt about the daughter of Latona
    We sometimes see, when pregnant is the air,
    So that it holds the thread which makes her zone.

Within the court of Heaven, whence I return,
    Are many jewels found, so fair and precious
    They cannot be transported from the realm;

And of them was the singing of those lights.
    Who takes not wings that he may fly up thither,
    The tidings thence may from the dumb await!

As soon as singing thus those burning suns
    Had round about us whirled themselves three times,
    Like unto stars neighbouring the steadfast poles,

Ladies they seemed, not from the dance released,
    But who stop short, in silence listening
    Till they have gathered the new melody.

And within one I heard beginning: “When
    The radiance of grace, by which is kindled
    True love, and which thereafter grows by loving,

Within thee multiplied is so resplendent
    That it conducts thee upward by that stair,
    Where without reascending none descends,

Who should deny the wine out of his vial
    Unto thy thirst, in liberty were not
    Except as water which descends not seaward.

Fain wouldst thou know with what plants is enflowered
    This garland that encircles with delight
    The Lady fair who makes thee strong for heaven.

Of the lambs was I of the holy flock
    Which Dominic conducteth by a road
    Where well one fattens if he strayeth not.

He who is nearest to me on the right
    My brother and master was; and he Albertus
    Is of Cologne, I Thomas of Aquinum.

If thou of all the others wouldst be certain,
    Follow behind my speaking with thy sight
    Upward along the blessed garland turning.

That next effulgence issues from the smile
    Of Gratian, who assisted both the courts
    In such wise that it pleased in Paradise.

The other which near by adorns our choir
    That Peter was who, e’en as the poor widow,
    Offered his treasure unto Holy Church.

The fifth light, that among us is the fairest,
    Breathes forth from such a love, that all the world
    Below is greedy to learn tidings of it.

Within it is the lofty mind, where knowledge
    So deep was put, that, if the true be true,
    To see so much there never rose a second.

Thou seest next the lustre of that taper,
    Which in the flesh below looked most within
    The angelic nature and its ministry.

Within that other little light is smiling
    The advocate of the Christian centuries,
    Out of whose rhetoric Augustine was furnished.

Now if thou trainest thy mind’s eye along
    From light to light pursuant of my praise,
    With thirst already of the eighth thou waitest.

By seeing every good therein exults
    The sainted soul, which the fallacious world
    Makes manifest to him who listeneth well;

The body whence ’twas hunted forth is lying
    Down in Cieldauro, and from martyrdom
    And banishment it came unto this peace.

See farther onward flame the burning breath
    Of Isidore, of Beda, and of Richard
    Who was in contemplation more than man.

This, whence to me returneth thy regard,
    The light is of a spirit unto whom
    In his grave meditations death seemed slow.

It is the light eternal of Sigier,
    Who, reading lectures in the Street of Straw,
    Did syllogize invidious verities.”

Then, as a horologe that calleth us
    What time the Bride of God is rising up
    With matins to her Spouse that he may love her,

Wherein one part the other draws and urges,
    Ting! ting! resounding with so sweet a note,
    That swells with love the spirit well disposed,

Thus I beheld the glorious wheel move round,
    And render voice to voice, in modulation
    And sweetness that can not be comprehended,

Excepting there where joy is made eternal.







O Thou insensate care of mortal men,
    How inconclusive are the syllogisms
    That make thee beat thy wings in downward flight!

One after laws and one to aphorisms
    Was going, and one following the priesthood,
    And one to reign by force or sophistry,

And one in theft, and one in state affairs,
    One in the pleasures of the flesh involved
    Wearied himself, one gave himself to ease;

When I, from all these things emancipate,
    With Beatrice above there in the Heavens
    With such exceeding glory was received!

When each one had returned unto that point
    Within the circle where it was before,
    It stood as in a candlestick a candle;

And from within the effulgence which at first
    Had spoken unto me, I heard begin
    Smiling while it more luminous became:

“Even as I am kindled in its ray,
    So, looking into the Eternal Light,
    The occasion of thy thoughts I apprehend.

Thou doubtest, and wouldst have me to resift
    In language so extended and so open
    My speech, that to thy sense it may be plain,

Where just before I said, ‘where well one fattens,’
    And where I said, ‘there never rose a second;’
    And here ’tis needful we distinguish well.

The Providence, which governeth the world
    With counsel, wherein all created vision
    Is vanquished ere it reach unto the bottom,

(So that towards her own Beloved might go
    The bride of Him who, uttering a loud cry,
    Espoused her with his consecrated blood,

Self-confident and unto Him more faithful,)
    Two Princes did ordain in her behoof,
    Which on this side and that might be her guide.

The one was all seraphical in ardour;
    The other by his wisdom upon earth
    A splendour was of light cherubical.

One will I speak of, for of both is spoken
    In praising one, whichever may be taken,
    Because unto one end their labours were.

Between Tupino and the stream that falls
    Down from the hill elect of blessed Ubald,
    A fertile slope of lofty mountain hangs,

From which Perugia feels the cold and heat
    Through Porta Sole, and behind it weep
    Gualdo and Nocera their grievous yoke.

From out that slope, there where it breaketh most
    Its steepness, rose upon the world a sun
    As this one does sometimes from out the Ganges;

Therefore let him who speaketh of that place,
    Say not Ascesi, for he would say little,
    But Orient, if he properly would speak.

He was not yet far distant from his rising
    Before he had begun to make the earth
    Some comfort from his mighty virtue feel.

For he in youth his father’s wrath incurred
    For certain Dame, to whom, as unto death,
    The gate of pleasure no one doth unlock;

And was before his spiritual court
    ‘Et coram patre’ unto her united;
    Then day by day more fervently he loved her.

She, reft of her first husband, scorned, obscure,
    One thousand and one hundred years and more,
    Waited without a suitor till he came.

Naught it availed to hear, that with Amyclas
    Found her unmoved at sounding of his voice
    He who struck terror into all the world;

Naught it availed being constant and undaunted,
    So that, when Mary still remained below,
    She mounted up with Christ upon the cross.

But that too darkly I may not proceed,
    Francis and Poverty for these two lovers
    Take thou henceforward in my speech diffuse.

Their concord and their joyous semblances,
    The love, the wonder, and the sweet regard,
    They made to be the cause of holy thoughts;

So much so that the venerable Bernard
    First bared his feet, and after so great peace
    Ran, and, in running, thought himself too slow.

O wealth unknown! O veritable good!
    Giles bares his feet, and bares his feet Sylvester
    Behind the bridegroom, so doth please the bride!

Then goes his way that father and that master,
    He and his Lady and that family
    Which now was girding on the humble cord;

Nor cowardice of heart weighed down his brow
    At being son of Peter Bernardone,
    Nor for appearing marvellously scorned;

But regally his hard determination
    To Innocent he opened, and from him
    Received the primal seal upon his Order.

After the people mendicant increased
    Behind this man, whose admirable life
    Better in glory of the heavens were sung,

Incoronated with a second crown
    Was through Honorius by the Eternal Spirit
    The holy purpose of this Archimandrite.

And when he had, through thirst of martyrdom,
    In the proud presence of the Sultan preached
    Christ and the others who came after him,

And, finding for conversion too unripe
    The folk, and not to tarry there in vain,
    Returned to fruit of the Italic grass,

On the rude rock ’twixt Tiber and the Arno
    From Christ did he receive the final seal,
    Which during two whole years his members bore.

When He, who chose him unto so much good,
    Was pleased to draw him up to the reward
    That he had merited by being lowly,

Unto his friars, as to the rightful heirs,
    His most dear Lady did he recommend,
    And bade that they should love her faithfully;

And from her bosom the illustrious soul
    Wished to depart, returning to its realm,
    And for its body wished no other bier.

Think now what man was he, who was a fit
    Companion over the high seas to keep
    The bark of Peter to its proper bearings.

And this man was our Patriarch; hence whoever
    Doth follow him as he commands can see
    That he is laden with good merchandise.

But for new pasturage his flock has grown
    So greedy, that it is impossible
    They be not scattered over fields diverse;

And in proportion as his sheep remote
    And vagabond go farther off from him,
    More void of milk return they to the fold.

Verily some there are that fear a hurt,
    And keep close to the shepherd; but so few,
    That little cloth doth furnish forth their hoods.

Now if my utterance be not indistinct,
    If thine own hearing hath attentive been,
    If thou recall to mind what I have said,

In part contented shall thy wishes be;
    For thou shalt see the plant that’s chipped away,
    And the rebuke that lieth in the words,

‘Where well one fattens, if he strayeth not.’”







Soon as the blessed flame had taken up
    The final word to give it utterance,
    Began the holy millstone to revolve,

And in its gyre had not turned wholly round,
    Before another in a ring enclosed it,
    And motion joined to motion, song to song;

Song that as greatly doth transcend our Muses,
    Our Sirens, in those dulcet clarions,
    As primal splendour that which is reflected.

And as are spanned athwart a tender cloud
    Two rainbows parallel and like in colour,
    When Juno to her handmaid gives command,

(The one without born of the one within,
    Like to the speaking of that vagrant one
    Whom love consumed as doth the sun the vapours,)

And make the people here, through covenant
    God set with Noah, presageful of the world
    That shall no more be covered with a flood,

In such wise of those sempiternal roses
    The garlands twain encompassed us about,
    And thus the outer to the inner answered.

After the dance, and other grand rejoicings,
    Both of the singing, and the flaming forth
    Effulgence with effulgence blithe and tender,

Together, at once, with one accord had stopped,
    (Even as the eyes, that, as volition moves them,
    Must needs together shut and lift themselves,)

Out of the heart of one of the new lights
    There came a voice, that needle to the star
    Made me appear in turning thitherward.

And it began: “The love that makes me fair
    Draws me to speak about the other leader,
    By whom so well is spoken here of mine.

’Tis right, where one is, to bring in the other,
    That, as they were united in their warfare,
    Together likewise may their glory shine.

The soldiery of Christ, which it had cost
    So dear to arm again, behind the standard
    Moved slow and doubtful and in numbers few,

When the Emperor who reigneth evermore
    Provided for the host that was in peril,
    Through grace alone and not that it was worthy;

And, as was said, he to his Bride brought succour
    With champions twain, at whose deed, at whose word
    The straggling people were together drawn.

Within that region where the sweet west wind
    Rises to open the new leaves, wherewith
    Europe is seen to clothe herself afresh,

Not far off from the beating of the waves,
    Behind which in his long career the sun
    Sometimes conceals himself from every man,

Is situate the fortunate Calahorra,
    Under protection of the mighty shield
    In which the Lion subject is and sovereign.

Therein was born the amorous paramour
    Of Christian Faith, the athlete consecrate,
    Kind to his own and cruel to his foes;

And when it was created was his mind
    Replete with such a living energy,
    That in his mother her it made prophetic.

As soon as the espousals were complete
    Between him and the Faith at holy font,
    Where they with mutual safety dowered each other,

The woman, who for him had given assent,
    Saw in a dream the admirable fruit
    That issue would from him and from his heirs;

And that he might be construed as he was,
    A spirit from this place went forth to name him
    With His possessive whose he wholly was.

Dominic was he called; and him I speak of
    Even as of the husbandman whom Christ
    Elected to his garden to assist him.

Envoy and servant sooth he seemed of Christ,
    For the first love made manifest in him
    Was the first counsel that was given by Christ.

Silent and wakeful many a time was he
    Discovered by his nurse upon the ground,
    As if he would have said, ‘For this I came.’

O thou his father, Felix verily!
    O thou his mother, verily Joanna,
    If this, interpreted, means as is said!

Not for the world which people toil for now
    In following Ostiense and Taddeo,
    But through his longing after the true manna,

He in short time became so great a teacher,
    That he began to go about the vineyard,
    Which fadeth soon, if faithless be the dresser;

And of the See, (that once was more benignant
    Unto the righteous poor, not through itself,
    But him who sits there and degenerates,)

Not to dispense or two or three for six,
    Not any fortune of first vacancy,
    ‘Non decimas quae sunt pauperum Dei,’

He asked for, but against the errant world
    Permission to do battle for the seed,
    Of which these four and twenty plants surround thee.

Then with the doctrine and the will together,
    With office apostolical he moved,
    Like torrent which some lofty vein out-presses;

And in among the shoots heretical
    His impetus with greater fury smote,
    Wherever the resistance was the greatest.

Of him were made thereafter divers runnels,
    Whereby the garden catholic is watered,
    So that more living its plantations stand.

If such the one wheel of the Biga was,
    In which the Holy Church itself defended
    And in the field its civic battle won,

Truly full manifest should be to thee
    The excellence of the other, unto whom
    Thomas so courteous was before my coming.

But still the orbit, which the highest part
    Of its circumference made, is derelict,
    So that the mould is where was once the crust.

His family, that had straight forward moved
    With feet upon his footprints, are turned round
    So that they set the point upon the heel.

And soon aware they will be of the harvest
    Of this bad husbandry, when shall the tares
    Complain the granary is taken from them.

Yet say I, he who searcheth leaf by leaf
    Our volume through, would still some page discover
    Where he could read, ‘I am as I am wont.’

’Twill not be from Casal nor Acquasparta,
    From whence come such unto the written word
    That one avoids it, and the other narrows.

Bonaventura of Bagnoregio’s life
    Am I, who always in great offices
    Postponed considerations sinister.

Here are Illuminato and Agostino,
    Who of the first barefooted beggars were
    That with the cord the friends of God became.

Hugh of Saint Victor is among them here,
    And Peter Mangiador, and Peter of Spain,
    Who down below in volumes twelve is shining;

Nathan the seer, and metropolitan
    Chrysostom, and Anselmus, and Donatus
    Who deigned to lay his hand to the first art;

Here is Rabanus, and beside me here
    Shines the Calabrian Abbot Joachim,
    He with the spirit of prophecy endowed.

To celebrate so great a paladin
    Have moved me the impassioned courtesy
    And the discreet discourses of Friar Thomas,

And with me they have moved this company.”







Let him imagine, who would well conceive
    What now I saw, and let him while I speak
    Retain the image as a steadfast rock,

The fifteen stars, that in their divers regions
    The sky enliven with a light so great
    That it transcends all clusters of the air;

Let him the Wain imagine unto which
    Our vault of heaven sufficeth night and day,
    So that in turning of its pole it fails not;

Let him the mouth imagine of the horn
    That in the point beginneth of the axis
    Round about which the primal wheel revolves,—

To have fashioned of themselves two signs in heaven,
    Like unto that which Minos’ daughter made,
    The moment when she felt the frost of death;

And one to have its rays within the other,
    And both to whirl themselves in such a manner
    That one should forward go, the other backward;

And he will have some shadowing forth of that
    True constellation and the double dance
    That circled round the point at which I was;

Because it is as much beyond our wont,
    As swifter than the motion of the Chiana
    Moveth the heaven that all the rest outspeeds.

There sang they neither Bacchus, nor Apollo,
    But in the divine nature Persons three,
    And in one person the divine and human.

The singing and the dance fulfilled their measure,
    And unto us those holy lights gave need,
    Growing in happiness from care to care.

Then broke the silence of those saints concordant
    The light in which the admirable life
    Of God’s own mendicant was told to me,

And said: “Now that one straw is trodden out
    Now that its seed is garnered up already,
    Sweet love invites me to thresh out the other.

Into that bosom, thou believest, whence
    Was drawn the rib to form the beauteous cheek
    Whose taste to all the world is costing dear,

And into that which, by the lance transfixed,
    Before and since, such satisfaction made
    That it weighs down the balance of all sin,

Whate’er of light it has to human nature
    Been lawful to possess was all infused
    By the same power that both of them created;

And hence at what I said above dost wonder,
    When I narrated that no second had
    The good which in the fifth light is enclosed.

Now ope thine eyes to what I answer thee,
    And thou shalt see thy creed and my discourse
    Fit in the truth as centre in a circle.

That which can die, and that which dieth not,
    Are nothing but the splendour of the idea
    Which by his love our Lord brings into being;

Because that living Light, which from its fount
    Effulgent flows, so that it disunites not
    From Him nor from the Love in them intrined,

Through its own goodness reunites its rays
    In nine subsistences, as in a mirror,
    Itself eternally remaining One.

Thence it descends to the last potencies,
    Downward from act to act becoming such
    That only brief contingencies it makes;

And these contingencies I hold to be
    Things generated, which the heaven produces
    By its own motion, with seed and without.

Neither their wax, nor that which tempers it,
    Remains immutable, and hence beneath
    The ideal signet more and less shines through;

Therefore it happens, that the selfsame tree
    After its kind bears worse and better fruit,
    And ye are born with characters diverse.

If in perfection tempered were the wax,
    And were the heaven in its supremest virtue,
    The brilliance of the seal would all appear;

But nature gives it evermore deficient,
    In the like manner working as the artist,
    Who has the skill of art and hand that trembles.

If then the fervent Love, the Vision clear,
    Of primal Virtue do dispose and seal,
    Perfection absolute is there acquired.

Thus was of old the earth created worthy
    Of all and every animal perfection;
    And thus the Virgin was impregnate made;

So that thine own opinion I commend,
    That human nature never yet has been,
    Nor will be, what it was in those two persons.

Now if no farther forth I should proceed,
    ‘Then in what way was he without a peer?’
    Would be the first beginning of thy words.

But, that may well appear what now appears not,
    Think who he was, and what occasion moved him
    To make request, when it was told him, ‘Ask.’

I’ve not so spoken that thou canst not see
    Clearly he was a king who asked for wisdom,
    That he might be sufficiently a king;

’Twas not to know the number in which are
    The motors here above, or if ‘necesse’
    With a contingent e’er ‘necesse’ make,

‘Non si est dare primum motum esse,’
    Or if in semicircle can be made
    Triangle so that it have no right angle.

Whence, if thou notest this and what I said,
    A regal prudence is that peerless seeing
    In which the shaft of my intention strikes.

And if on ‘rose’ thou turnest thy clear eyes,
    Thou’lt see that it has reference alone
    To kings who’re many, and the good are rare.

With this distinction take thou what I said,
    And thus it can consist with thy belief
    Of the first father and of our Delight.

And lead shall this be always to thy feet,
    To make thee, like a weary man, move slowly
    Both to the Yes and No thou seest not;

For very low among the fools is he
    Who affirms without distinction, or denies,
    As well in one as in the other case;

Because it happens that full often bends
    Current opinion in the false direction,
    And then the feelings bind the intellect.

Far more than uselessly he leaves the shore,
    (Since he returneth not the same he went,)
    Who fishes for the truth, and has no skill;

And in the world proofs manifest thereof
    Parmenides, Melissus, Brissus are,
    And many who went on and knew not whither;

Thus did Sabellius, Arius, and those fools
    Who have been even as swords unto the Scriptures
    In rendering distorted their straight faces.

Nor yet shall people be too confident
    In judging, even as he is who doth count
    The corn in field or ever it be ripe.

For I have seen all winter long the thorn
    First show itself intractable and fierce,
    And after bear the rose upon its top;

And I have seen a ship direct and swift
    Run o’er the sea throughout its course entire,
    To perish at the harbour’s mouth at last.

Let not Dame Bertha nor Ser Martin think,
    Seeing one steal, another offering make,
    To see them in the arbitrament divine;

For one may rise, and fall the other may.”







From centre unto rim, from rim to centre,
    In a round vase the water moves itself,
    As from without ’tis struck or from within.

Into my mind upon a sudden dropped
    What I am saying, at the moment when
    Silent became the glorious life of Thomas,

Because of the resemblance that was born
    Of his discourse and that of Beatrice,
    Whom, after him, it pleased thus to begin:

“This man has need (and does not tell you so,
    Nor with the voice, nor even in his thought)
    Of going to the root of one truth more.

Declare unto him if the light wherewith
    Blossoms your substance shall remain with you
    Eternally the same that it is now;

And if it do remain, say in what manner,
    After ye are again made visible,
    It can be that it injure not your sight.”

As by a greater gladness urged and drawn
    They who are dancing in a ring sometimes
    Uplift their voices and their motions quicken;

So, at that orison devout and prompt,
    The holy circles a new joy displayed
    In their revolving and their wondrous song.

Whoso lamenteth him that here we die
    That we may live above, has never there
    Seen the refreshment of the eternal rain.

The One and Two and Three who ever liveth,
    And reigneth ever in Three and Two and One,
    Not circumscribed and all things circumscribing,

Three several times was chanted by each one
    Among those spirits, with such melody
    That for all merit it were just reward;

And, in the lustre most divine of all
    The lesser ring, I heard a modest voice,
    Such as perhaps the Angel’s was to Mary,

Answer: “As long as the festivity
    Of Paradise shall be, so long our love
    Shall radiate round about us such a vesture.

Its brightness is proportioned to the ardour,
    The ardour to the vision; and the vision
    Equals what grace it has above its worth.

When, glorious and sanctified, our flesh
    Is reassumed, then shall our persons be
    More pleasing by their being all complete;

For will increase whate’er bestows on us
    Of light gratuitous the Good Supreme,
    Light which enables us to look on Him;

Therefore the vision must perforce increase,
    Increase the ardour which from that is kindled,
    Increase the radiance which from this proceeds.

But even as a coal that sends forth flame,
    And by its vivid whiteness overpowers it
    So that its own appearance it maintains,

Thus the effulgence that surrounds us now
    Shall be o’erpowered in aspect by the flesh,
    Which still to-day the earth doth cover up;

Nor can so great a splendour weary us,
    For strong will be the organs of the body
    To everything which hath the power to please us.”

So sudden and alert appeared to me
    Both one and the other choir to say Amen,
    That well they showed desire for their dead bodies;

Nor sole for them perhaps, but for the mothers,
    The fathers, and the rest who had been dear
    Or ever they became eternal flames.

And lo! all round about of equal brightness
    Arose a lustre over what was there,
    Like an horizon that is clearing up.

And as at rise of early eve begin
    Along the welkin new appearances,
    So that the sight seems real and unreal,

It seemed to me that new subsistences
    Began there to be seen, and make a circle
    Outside the other two circumferences.

O very sparkling of the Holy Spirit,
    How sudden and incandescent it became
    Unto mine eyes, that vanquished bore it not!

But Beatrice so beautiful and smiling
    Appeared to me, that with the other sights
    That followed not my memory I must leave her.

Then to uplift themselves mine eyes resumed
    The power, and I beheld myself translated
    To higher salvation with my Lady only.

Well was I ware that I was more uplifted
    By the enkindled smiling of the star,
    That seemed to me more ruddy than its wont.

With all my heart, and in that dialect
    Which is the same in all, such holocaust
    To God I made as the new grace beseemed;

And not yet from my bosom was exhausted
    The ardour of sacrifice, before I knew
    This offering was accepted and auspicious;

For with so great a lustre and so red
    Splendours appeared to me in twofold rays,
    I said: “O Helios who dost so adorn them!”

Even as distinct with less and greater lights
    Glimmers between the two poles of the world
    The Galaxy that maketh wise men doubt,

Thus constellated in the depths of Mars,
    Those rays described the venerable sign
    That quadrants joining in a circle make.

Here doth my memory overcome my genius;
    For on that cross as levin gleamed forth Christ,
    So that I cannot find ensample worthy;

But he who takes his cross and follows Christ
    Again will pardon me what I omit,
    Seeing in that aurora lighten Christ.

From horn to horn, and ’twixt the top and base,
    Lights were in motion, brightly scintillating
    As they together met and passed each other;

Thus level and aslant and swift and slow
    We here behold, renewing still the sight,
    The particles of bodies long and short,

Across the sunbeam move, wherewith is listed
    Sometimes the shade, which for their own defence
    People with cunning and with art contrive.

And as a lute and harp, accordant strung
    With many strings, a dulcet tinkling make
    To him by whom the notes are not distinguished,

So from the lights that there to me appeared
    Upgathered through the cross a melody,
    Which rapt me, not distinguishing the hymn.

Well was I ware it was of lofty laud,
    Because there came to me, “Arise and conquer!”
    As unto him who hears and comprehends not.

So much enamoured I became therewith,
    That until then there was not anything
    That e’er had fettered me with such sweet bonds.

Perhaps my word appears somewhat too bold,
    Postponing the delight of those fair eyes,
    Into which gazing my desire has rest;

But who bethinks him that the living seals
    Of every beauty grow in power ascending,
    And that I there had not turned round to those,

Can me excuse, if I myself accuse
    To excuse myself, and see that I speak truly:
    For here the holy joy is not disclosed,

Because ascending it becomes more pure.







A will benign, in which reveals itself
    Ever the love that righteously inspires,
    As in the iniquitous, cupidity,

Silence imposed upon that dulcet lyre,
    And quieted the consecrated chords,
    That Heaven’s right hand doth tighten and relax.

How unto just entreaties shall be deaf
    Those substances, which, to give me desire
    Of praying them, with one accord grew silent?

’Tis well that without end he should lament,
    Who for the love of thing that doth not last
    Eternally despoils him of that love!

As through the pure and tranquil evening air
    There shoots from time to time a sudden fire,
    Moving the eyes that steadfast were before,

And seems to be a star that changeth place,
    Except that in the part where it is kindled
    Nothing is missed, and this endureth little;

So from the horn that to the right extends
    Unto that cross’s foot there ran a star
    Out of the constellation shining there;

Nor was the gem dissevered from its ribbon,
    But down the radiant fillet ran along,
    So that fire seemed it behind alabaster.

Thus piteous did Anchises’ shade reach forward,
    If any faith our greatest Muse deserve,
    When in Elysium he his son perceived.

“O sanguis meus, O superinfusa
    Gratia Dei, sicut tibi, cui
    Bis unquam Coeli janua reclusa?”

Thus that effulgence; whence I gave it heed;
    Then round unto my Lady turned my sight,
    And on this side and that was stupefied;

For in her eyes was burning such a smile
    That with mine own methought I touched the bottom
    Both of my grace and of my Paradise!

Then, pleasant to the hearing and the sight,
    The spirit joined to its beginning things
    I understood not, so profound it spake;

Nor did it hide itself from me by choice,
    But by necessity; for its conception
    Above the mark of mortals set itself.

And when the bow of burning sympathy
    Was so far slackened, that its speech descended
    Towards the mark of our intelligence,

The first thing that was understood by me
    Was “Benedight be Thou, O Trine and One,
    Who hast unto my seed so courteous been!”

And it continued: “Hunger long and grateful,
    Drawn from the reading of the mighty volume
    Wherein is never changed the white nor dark,

Thou hast appeased, my son, within this light
    In which I speak to thee, by grace of her
    Who to this lofty flight with plumage clothed thee.

Thou thinkest that to me thy thought doth pass
    From Him who is the first, as from the unit,
    If that be known, ray out the five and six;

And therefore who I am thou askest not,
    And why I seem more joyous unto thee
    Than any other of this gladsome crowd.

Thou think’st the truth; because the small and great
    Of this existence look into the mirror
    Wherein, before thou think’st, thy thought thou showest.

But that the sacred love, in which I watch
    With sight perpetual, and which makes me thirst
    With sweet desire, may better be fulfilled,

Now let thy voice secure and frank and glad
    Proclaim the wishes, the desire proclaim,
    To which my answer is decreed already.”

To Beatrice I turned me, and she heard
    Before I spake, and smiled to me a sign,
    That made the wings of my desire increase;

Then in this wise began I: “Love and knowledge,
    When on you dawned the first Equality,
    Of the same weight for each of you became;

For in the Sun, which lighted you and burned
    With heat and radiance, they so equal are,
    That all similitudes are insufficient.

But among mortals will and argument,
    For reason that to you is manifest,
    Diversely feathered in their pinions are.

Whence I, who mortal am, feel in myself
    This inequality; so give not thanks,
    Save in my heart, for this paternal welcome.

Truly do I entreat thee, living topaz!
    Set in this precious jewel as a gem,
    That thou wilt satisfy me with thy name.”

“O leaf of mine, in whom I pleasure took
    E’en while awaiting, I was thine own root!”
    Such a beginning he in answer made me.

Then said to me: “That one from whom is named
    Thy race, and who a hundred years and more
    Has circled round the mount on the first cornice,

A son of mine and thy great-grandsire was;
    Well it behoves thee that the long fatigue
    Thou shouldst for him make shorter with thy works.

Florence, within the ancient boundary
    From which she taketh still her tierce and nones,
    Abode in quiet, temperate and chaste.

No golden chain she had, nor coronal,
    Nor ladies shod with sandal shoon, nor girdle
    That caught the eye more than the person did.

Not yet the daughter at her birth struck fear
    Into the father, for the time and dower
    Did not o’errun this side or that the measure.

No houses had she void of families,
    Not yet had thither come Sardanapalus
    To show what in a chamber can be done;

Not yet surpassed had Montemalo been
    By your Uccellatojo, which surpassed
    Shall in its downfall be as in its rise.

Bellincion Berti saw I go begirt
    With leather and with bone, and from the mirror
    His dame depart without a painted face;

And him of Nerli saw, and him of Vecchio,
    Contented with their simple suits of buff
    And with the spindle and the flax their dames.

O fortunate women! and each one was certain
    Of her own burial-place, and none as yet
    For sake of France was in her bed deserted.

One o’er the cradle kept her studious watch,
    And in her lullaby the language used
    That first delights the fathers and the mothers;

Another, drawing tresses from her distaff,
    Told o’er among her family the tales
    Of Trojans and of Fesole and Rome.

As great a marvel then would have been held
    A Lapo Salterello, a Cianghella,
    As Cincinnatus or Cornelia now.

To such a quiet, such a beautiful
    Life of the citizen, to such a safe
    Community, and to so sweet an inn,

Did Mary give me, with loud cries invoked,
    And in your ancient Baptistery at once
    Christian and Cacciaguida I became.

Moronto was my brother, and Eliseo;
    From Val di Pado came to me my wife,
    And from that place thy surname was derived.

I followed afterward the Emperor Conrad,
    And he begirt me of his chivalry,
    So much I pleased him with my noble deeds.

I followed in his train against that law’s
    Iniquity, whose people doth usurp
    Your just possession, through your Pastor’s fault.

There by that execrable race was I
    Released from bonds of the fallacious world,
    The love of which defileth many souls,

And came from martyrdom unto this peace.”







O thou our poor nobility of blood,
    If thou dost make the people glory in thee
    Down here where our affection languishes,

A marvellous thing it ne’er will be to me;
    For there where appetite is not perverted,
    I say in Heaven, of thee I made a boast!

Truly thou art a cloak that quickly shortens,
    So that unless we piece thee day by day
    Time goeth round about thee with his shears!

With ‘You,’ which Rome was first to tolerate,
    (Wherein her family less perseveres,)
    Yet once again my words beginning made;

Whence Beatrice, who stood somewhat apart,
    Smiling, appeared like unto her who coughed
    At the first failing writ of Guenever.

And I began: “You are my ancestor,
    You give to me all hardihood to speak,
    You lift me so that I am more than I.

So many rivulets with gladness fill
    My mind, that of itself it makes a joy
    Because it can endure this and not burst.

Then tell me, my beloved root ancestral,
    Who were your ancestors, and what the years
    That in your boyhood chronicled themselves?

Tell me about the sheepfold of Saint John,
    How large it was, and who the people were
    Within it worthy of the highest seats.”

As at the blowing of the winds a coal
    Quickens to flame, so I beheld that light
    Become resplendent at my blandishments.

And as unto mine eyes it grew more fair,
    With voice more sweet and tender, but not in
    This modern dialect, it said to me:

“From uttering of the ‘Ave,’ till the birth
    In which my mother, who is now a saint,
    Of me was lightened who had been her burden,

Unto its Lion had this fire returned
    Five hundred fifty times and thirty more,
    To reinflame itself beneath his paw.

My ancestors and I our birthplace had
    Where first is found the last ward of the city
    By him who runneth in your annual game.

Suffice it of my elders to hear this;
    But who they were, and whence they thither came,
    Silence is more considerate than speech.

All those who at that time were there between
    Mars and the Baptist, fit for bearing arms,
    Were a fifth part of those who now are living;

But the community, that now is mixed
    With Campi and Certaldo and Figghine,
    Pure in the lowest artisan was seen.

O how much better ’twere to have as neighbours
    The folk of whom I speak, and at Galluzzo
    And at Trespiano have your boundary,

Than have them in the town, and bear the stench
    Of Aguglione’s churl, and him of Signa
    Who has sharp eyes for trickery already.

Had not the folk, which most of all the world
    Degenerates, been a step-dame unto Caesar,
    But as a mother to her son benignant,

Some who turn Florentines, and trade and discount,
    Would have gone back again to Simifonte
    There where their grandsires went about as beggars.

At Montemurlo still would be the Counts,
    The Cerchi in the parish of Acone,
    Perhaps in Valdigrieve the Buondelmonti.

Ever the intermingling of the people
    Has been the source of malady in cities,
    As in the body food it surfeits on;

And a blind bull more headlong plunges down
    Than a blind lamb; and very often cuts
    Better and more a single sword than five.

If Luni thou regard, and Urbisaglia,
    How they have passed away, and how are passing
    Chiusi and Sinigaglia after them,

To hear how races waste themselves away,
    Will seem to thee no novel thing nor hard,
    Seeing that even cities have an end.

All things of yours have their mortality,
    Even as yourselves; but it is hidden in some
    That a long while endure, and lives are short;

And as the turning of the lunar heaven
    Covers and bares the shores without a pause,
    In the like manner fortune does with Florence.

Therefore should not appear a marvellous thing
    What I shall say of the great Florentines
    Of whom the fame is hidden in the Past.

I saw the Ughi, saw the Catellini,
    Filippi, Greci, Ormanni, and Alberichi,
    Even in their fall illustrious citizens;

And saw, as mighty as they ancient were,
    With him of La Sannella him of Arca,
    And Soldanier, Ardinghi, and Bostichi.

Near to the gate that is at present laden
    With a new felony of so much weight
    That soon it shall be jetsam from the bark,

The Ravignani were, from whom descended
    The County Guido, and whoe’er the name
    Of the great Bellincione since hath taken.

He of La Pressa knew the art of ruling
    Already, and already Galigajo
    Had hilt and pommel gilded in his house.

Mighty already was the Column Vair,
    Sacchetti, Giuochi, Fifant, and Barucci,
    And Galli, and they who for the bushel blush.

The stock from which were the Calfucci born
    Was great already, and already chosen
    To curule chairs the Sizii and Arrigucci.

O how beheld I those who are undone
    By their own pride! and how the Balls of Gold
    Florence enflowered in all their mighty deeds!

So likewise did the ancestors of those
    Who evermore, when vacant is your church,
    Fatten by staying in consistory.

The insolent race, that like a dragon follows
    Whoever flees, and unto him that shows
    His teeth or purse is gentle as a lamb,

Already rising was, but from low people;
    So that it pleased not Ubertin Donato
    That his wife’s father should make him their kin.

Already had Caponsacco to the Market
    From Fesole descended, and already
    Giuda and Infangato were good burghers.

I’ll tell a thing incredible, but true;
    One entered the small circuit by a gate
    Which from the Della Pera took its name!

Each one that bears the beautiful escutcheon
    Of the great baron whose renown and name
    The festival of Thomas keepeth fresh,

Knighthood and privilege from him received;
    Though with the populace unites himself
    To-day the man who binds it with a border.

Already were Gualterotti and Importuni;
    And still more quiet would the Borgo be
    If with new neighbours it remained unfed.

The house from which is born your lamentation,
    Through just disdain that death among you brought
    And put an end unto your joyous life,

Was honoured in itself and its companions.
    O Buondelmonte, how in evil hour
    Thou fled’st the bridal at another’s promptings!

Many would be rejoicing who are sad,
    If God had thee surrendered to the Ema
    The first time that thou camest to the city.

But it behoved the mutilated stone
    Which guards the bridge, that Florence should provide
    A victim in her latest hour of peace.

With all these families, and others with them,
    Florence beheld I in so great repose,
    That no occasion had she whence to weep;

With all these families beheld so just
    And glorious her people, that the lily
    Never upon the spear was placed reversed,

Nor by division was vermilion made.”







As came to Clymene, to be made certain
    Of that which he had heard against himself,
    He who makes fathers chary still to children,

Even such was I, and such was I perceived
    By Beatrice and by the holy light
    That first on my account had changed its place.

Therefore my Lady said to me: “Send forth
    The flame of thy desire, so that it issue
    Imprinted well with the internal stamp;

Not that our knowledge may be greater made
    By speech of thine, but to accustom thee
    To tell thy thirst, that we may give thee drink.”

“O my beloved tree, (that so dost lift thee,
    That even as minds terrestrial perceive
    No triangle containeth two obtuse,

So thou beholdest the contingent things
    Ere in themselves they are, fixing thine eyes
    Upon the point in which all times are present,)

While I was with Virgilius conjoined
    Upon the mountain that the souls doth heal,
    And when descending into the dead world,

Were spoken to me of my future life
    Some grievous words; although I feel myself
    In sooth foursquare against the blows of chance.

On this account my wish would be content
    To hear what fortune is approaching me,
    Because foreseen an arrow comes more slowly.”

Thus did I say unto that selfsame light
    That unto me had spoken before; and even
    As Beatrice willed was my own will confessed.

Not in vague phrase, in which the foolish folk
    Ensnared themselves of old, ere yet was slain
    The Lamb of God who taketh sins away,

But with clear words and unambiguous
    Language responded that paternal love,
    Hid and revealed by its own proper smile:

“Contingency, that outside of the volume
    Of your materiality extends not,
    Is all depicted in the eternal aspect.

Necessity however thence it takes not,
    Except as from the eye, in which ’tis mirrored,
    A ship that with the current down descends.

From thence, e’en as there cometh to the ear
    Sweet harmony from an organ, comes in sight
    To me the time that is preparing for thee.

As forth from Athens went Hippolytus,
    By reason of his step-dame false and cruel,
    So thou from Florence must perforce depart.

Already this is willed, and this is sought for;
    And soon it shall be done by him who thinks it,
    Where every day the Christ is bought and sold.

The blame shall follow the offended party
    In outcry as is usual; but the vengeance
    Shall witness to the truth that doth dispense it.

Thou shalt abandon everything beloved
    Most tenderly, and this the arrow is
    Which first the bow of banishment shoots forth.

Thou shalt have proof how savoureth of salt
    The bread of others, and how hard a road
    The going down and up another’s stairs.

And that which most shall weigh upon thy shoulders
    Will be the bad and foolish company
    With which into this valley thou shalt fall;

For all ingrate, all mad and impious
    Will they become against thee; but soon after
    They, and not thou, shall have the forehead scarlet.

Of their bestiality their own proceedings
    Shall furnish proof; so ’twill be well for thee
    A party to have made thee by thyself.

Thine earliest refuge and thine earliest inn
    Shall be the mighty Lombard’s courtesy,
    Who on the Ladder bears the holy bird,

Who such benign regard shall have for thee
    That ’twixt you twain, in doing and in asking,
    That shall be first which is with others last.

With him shalt thou see one who at his birth
    Has by this star of strength been so impressed,
    That notable shall his achievements be.

Not yet the people are aware of him
    Through his young age, since only nine years yet
    Around about him have these wheels revolved.

But ere the Gascon cheat the noble Henry,
    Some sparkles of his virtue shall appear
    In caring not for silver nor for toil.

So recognized shall his magnificence
    Become hereafter, that his enemies
    Will not have power to keep mute tongues about it.

On him rely, and on his benefits;
    By him shall many people be transformed,
    Changing condition rich and mendicant;

And written in thy mind thou hence shalt bear
    Of him, but shalt not say it”—and things said he
    Incredible to those who shall be present.

Then added: “Son, these are the commentaries
    On what was said to thee; behold the snares
    That are concealed behind few revolutions;

Yet would I not thy neighbours thou shouldst envy,
    Because thy life into the future reaches
    Beyond the punishment of their perfidies.”

When by its silence showed that sainted soul
    That it had finished putting in the woof
    Into that web which I had given it warped,

Began I, even as he who yearneth after,
    Being in doubt, some counsel from a person
    Who seeth, and uprightly wills, and loves:

“Well see I, father mine, how spurreth on
    The time towards me such a blow to deal me
    As heaviest is to him who most gives way.

Therefore with foresight it is well I arm me,
    That, if the dearest place be taken from me,
    I may not lose the others by my songs.

Down through the world of infinite bitterness,
    And o’er the mountain, from whose beauteous summit
    The eyes of my own Lady lifted me,

And afterward through heaven from light to light,
    I have learned that which, if I tell again,
    Will be a savour of strong herbs to many.

And if I am a timid friend to truth,
    I fear lest I may lose my life with those
    Who will hereafter call this time the olden.”

The light in which was smiling my own treasure
    Which there I had discovered, flashed at first
    As in the sunshine doth a golden mirror;

Then made reply: “A conscience overcast
    Or with its own or with another’s shame,
    Will taste forsooth the tartness of thy word;

But ne’ertheless, all falsehood laid aside,
    Make manifest thy vision utterly,
    And let them scratch wherever is the itch;

For if thine utterance shall offensive be
    At the first taste, a vital nutriment
    ’Twill leave thereafter, when it is digested.

This cry of thine shall do as doth the wind,
    Which smiteth most the most exalted summits,
    And that is no slight argument of honour.

Therefore are shown to thee within these wheels,
    Upon the mount and in the dolorous valley,
    Only the souls that unto fame are known;

Because the spirit of the hearer rests not,
    Nor doth confirm its faith by an example
    Which has the root of it unknown and hidden,

Or other reason that is not apparent.”







Now was alone rejoicing in its word
    That soul beatified, and I was tasting
    My own, the bitter tempering with the sweet,

And the Lady who to God was leading me
    Said: “Change thy thought; consider that I am
    Near unto Him who every wrong disburdens.”

Unto the loving accents of my comfort
    I turned me round, and then what love I saw
    Within those holy eyes I here relinquish;

Not only that my language I distrust,
    But that my mind cannot return so far
    Above itself, unless another guide it.

Thus much upon that point can I repeat,
    That, her again beholding, my affection
    From every other longing was released.

While the eternal pleasure, which direct
    Rayed upon Beatrice, from her fair face
    Contented me with its reflected aspect,

Conquering me with the radiance of a smile,
    She said to me, “Turn thee about and listen;
    Not in mine eyes alone is Paradise.”

Even as sometimes here do we behold
    The affection in the look, if it be such
    That all the soul is wrapt away by it,

So, by the flaming of the effulgence holy
    To which I turned, I recognized therein
    The wish of speaking to me somewhat farther.

And it began: “In this fifth resting-place
    Upon the tree that liveth by its summit,
    And aye bears fruit, and never loses leaf,

Are blessed spirits that below, ere yet
    They came to Heaven, were of such great renown
    That every Muse therewith would affluent be.

Therefore look thou upon the cross’s horns;
    He whom I now shall name will there enact
    What doth within a cloud its own swift fire.”

I saw athwart the Cross a splendour drawn
    By naming Joshua, (even as he did it,)
    Nor noted I the word before the deed;

And at the name of the great Maccabee
    I saw another move itself revolving,
    And gladness was the whip unto that top.

Likewise for Charlemagne and for Orlando,
    Two of them my regard attentive followed
    As followeth the eye its falcon flying.

William thereafterward, and Renouard,
    And the Duke Godfrey, did attract my sight
    Along upon that Cross, and Robert Guiscard.

Then, moved and mingled with the other lights,
    The soul that had addressed me showed how great
    An artist ’twas among the heavenly singers.

To my right side I turned myself around,
    My duty to behold in Beatrice
    Either by words or gesture signified;

And so translucent I beheld her eyes,
    So full of pleasure, that her countenance
    Surpassed its other and its latest wont.

And as, by feeling greater delectation,
    A man in doing good from day to day
    Becomes aware his virtue is increasing,

So I became aware that my gyration
    With heaven together had increased its arc,
    That miracle beholding more adorned.

And such as is the change, in little lapse
    Of time, in a pale woman, when her face
    Is from the load of bashfulness unladen,

Such was it in mine eyes, when I had turned,
    Caused by the whiteness of the temperate star,
    The sixth, which to itself had gathered me.

Within that Jovial torch did I behold
    The sparkling of the love which was therein
    Delineate our language to mine eyes.

And even as birds uprisen from the shore,
    As in congratulation o’er their food,
    Make squadrons of themselves, now round, now long,

So from within those lights the holy creatures
    Sang flying to and fro, and in their figures
    Made of themselves now D, now I, now L.

First singing they to their own music moved;
    Then one becoming of these characters,
    A little while they rested and were silent.

O divine Pegasea, thou who genius
    Dost glorious make, and render it long-lived,
    And this through thee the cities and the kingdoms,

Illume me with thyself, that I may bring
    Their figures out as I have them conceived!
    Apparent be thy power in these brief verses!

Themselves then they displayed in five times seven
    Vowels and consonants; and I observed
    The parts as they seemed spoken unto me.

‘Diligite justitiam,’ these were
    First verb and noun of all that was depicted;
    ‘Qui judicatis terram’ were the last.

Thereafter in the M of the fifth word
    Remained they so arranged, that Jupiter
    Seemed to be silver there with gold inlaid.

And other lights I saw descend where was
    The summit of the M, and pause there singing
    The good, I think, that draws them to itself.

Then, as in striking upon burning logs
    Upward there fly innumerable sparks,
    Whence fools are wont to look for auguries,

More than a thousand lights seemed thence to rise,
    And to ascend, some more, and others less,
    Even as the Sun that lights them had allotted;

And, each one being quiet in its place,
    The head and neck beheld I of an eagle
    Delineated by that inlaid fire.

He who there paints has none to be his guide;
    But Himself guides; and is from Him remembered
    That virtue which is form unto the nest.

The other beatitude, that contented seemed
    At first to bloom a lily on the M,
    By a slight motion followed out the imprint.

O gentle star! what and how many gems
    Did demonstrate to me, that all our justice
    Effect is of that heaven which thou ingemmest!

Wherefore I pray the Mind, in which begin
    Thy motion and thy virtue, to regard
    Whence comes the smoke that vitiates thy rays;

So that a second time it now be wroth
    With buying and with selling in the temple
    Whose walls were built with signs and martyrdoms!

O soldiery of heaven, whom I contemplate,
    Implore for those who are upon the earth
    All gone astray after the bad example!

Once ’twas the custom to make war with swords;
    But now ’tis made by taking here and there
    The bread the pitying Father shuts from none.

Yet thou, who writest but to cancel, think
    That Peter and that Paul, who for this vineyard
    Which thou art spoiling died, are still alive!

Well canst thou say: “So steadfast my desire
    Is unto him who willed to live alone,
    And for a dance was led to martyrdom,

That I know not the Fisherman nor Paul.”







Appeared before me with its wings outspread
    The beautiful image that in sweet fruition
    Made jubilant the interwoven souls;

Appeared a little ruby each, wherein
    Ray of the sun was burning so enkindled
    That each into mine eyes refracted it.

And what it now behoves me to retrace
    Nor voice has e’er reported, nor ink written,
    Nor was by fantasy e’er comprehended;

For speak I saw, and likewise heard, the beak,
    And utter with its voice both ‘I’ and ‘My,’
    When in conception it was ‘We’ and ‘Our.’

And it began: “Being just and merciful
    Am I exalted here unto that glory
    Which cannot be exceeded by desire;

And upon earth I left my memory
    Such, that the evil-minded people there
    Commend it, but continue not the story.”

So doth a single heat from many embers
    Make itself felt, even as from many loves
    Issued a single sound from out that image.

Whence I thereafter: “O perpetual flowers
    Of the eternal joy, that only one
    Make me perceive your odours manifold,

Exhaling, break within me the great fast
    Which a long season has in hunger held me,
    Not finding for it any food on earth.

Well do I know, that if in heaven its mirror
    Justice Divine another realm doth make,
    Yours apprehends it not through any veil.

You know how I attentively address me
    To listen; and you know what is the doubt
    That is in me so very old a fast.”

Even as a falcon, issuing from his hood,
    Doth move his head, and with his wings applaud him,
    Showing desire, and making himself fine,

Saw I become that standard, which of lauds
    Was interwoven of the grace divine,
    With such songs as he knows who there rejoices.

Then it began: “He who a compass turned
    On the world’s outer verge, and who within it
    Devised so much occult and manifest,

Could not the impress of his power so make
    On all the universe, as that his Word
    Should not remain in infinite excess.

And this makes certain that the first proud being,
    Who was the paragon of every creature,
    By not awaiting light fell immature.

And hence appears it, that each minor nature
    Is scant receptacle unto that good
    Which has no end, and by itself is measured.

In consequence our vision, which perforce
    Must be some ray of that intelligence
    With which all things whatever are replete,

Cannot in its own nature be so potent,
    That it shall not its origin discern
    Far beyond that which is apparent to it.

Therefore into the justice sempiternal
    The power of vision that your world receives,
    As eye into the ocean, penetrates;

Which, though it see the bottom near the shore,
    Upon the deep perceives it not, and yet
    ’Tis there, but it is hidden by the depth.

There is no light but comes from the serene
    That never is o’ercast, nay, it is darkness
    Or shadow of the flesh, or else its poison.

Amply to thee is opened now the cavern
    Which has concealed from thee the living justice
    Of which thou mad’st such frequent questioning.

For saidst thou: ‘Born a man is on the shore
    Of Indus, and is none who there can speak
    Of Christ, nor who can read, nor who can write;

And all his inclinations and his actions
    Are good, so far as human reason sees,
    Without a sin in life or in discourse:

He dieth unbaptised and without faith;
    Where is this justice that condemneth him?
    Where is his fault, if he do not believe?’

Now who art thou, that on the bench wouldst sit
    In judgment at a thousand miles away,
    With the short vision of a single span?

Truly to him who with me subtilizes,
    If so the Scripture were not over you,
    For doubting there were marvellous occasion.

O animals terrene, O stolid minds,
    The primal will, that in itself is good,
    Ne’er from itself, the Good Supreme, has moved.

So much is just as is accordant with it;
    No good created draws it to itself,
    But it, by raying forth, occasions that.”

Even as above her nest goes circling round
    The stork when she has fed her little ones,
    And he who has been fed looks up at her,

So lifted I my brows, and even such
    Became the blessed image, which its wings
    Was moving, by so many counsels urged.

Circling around it sang, and said: “As are
    My notes to thee, who dost not comprehend them,
    Such is the eternal judgment to you mortals.”

Those lucent splendours of the Holy Spirit
    Grew quiet then, but still within the standard
    That made the Romans reverend to the world.

It recommenced: “Unto this kingdom never
    Ascended one who had not faith in Christ,
    Before or since he to the tree was nailed.

But look thou, many crying are, ‘Christ, Christ!’
    Who at the judgment shall be far less near
    To him than some shall be who knew not Christ.

Such Christians shall the Ethiop condemn,
    When the two companies shall be divided,
    The one for ever rich, the other poor.

What to your kings may not the Persians say,
    When they that volume opened shall behold
    In which are written down all their dispraises?

There shall be seen, among the deeds of Albert,
    That which ere long shall set the pen in motion,
    For which the realm of Prague shall be deserted.

There shall be seen the woe that on the Seine
    He brings by falsifying of the coin,
    Who by the blow of a wild boar shall die.

There shall be seen the pride that causes thirst,
    Which makes the Scot and Englishman so mad
    That they within their boundaries cannot rest;

Be seen the luxury and effeminate life
    Of him of Spain, and the Bohemian,
    Who valour never knew and never wished;

Be seen the Cripple of Jerusalem,
    His goodness represented by an I,
    While the reverse an M shall represent;

Be seen the avarice and poltroonery
    Of him who guards the Island of the Fire,
    Wherein Anchises finished his long life;

And to declare how pitiful he is
    Shall be his record in contracted letters
    Which shall make note of much in little space.

And shall appear to each one the foul deeds
    Of uncle and of brother who a nation
    So famous have dishonoured, and two crowns.

And he of Portugal and he of Norway
    Shall there be known, and he of Rascia too,
    Who saw in evil hour the coin of Venice.

O happy Hungary, if she let herself
    Be wronged no farther! and Navarre the happy,
    If with the hills that gird her she be armed!

And each one may believe that now, as hansel
    Thereof, do Nicosia and Famagosta
    Lament and rage because of their own beast,

Who from the others’ flank departeth not.”







When he who all the world illuminates
    Out of our hemisphere so far descends
    That on all sides the daylight is consumed,

The heaven, that erst by him alone was kindled,
    Doth suddenly reveal itself again
    By many lights, wherein is one resplendent.

And came into my mind this act of heaven,
    When the ensign of the world and of its leaders
    Had silent in the blessed beak become;

Because those living luminaries all,
    By far more luminous, did songs begin
    Lapsing and falling from my memory.

O gentle Love, that with a smile dost cloak thee,
    How ardent in those sparks didst thou appear,
    That had the breath alone of holy thoughts!

After the precious and pellucid crystals,
    With which begemmed the sixth light I beheld,
    Silence imposed on the angelic bells,

I seemed to hear the murmuring of a river
    That clear descendeth down from rock to rock,
    Showing the affluence of its mountain-top.

And as the sound upon the cithern’s neck
    Taketh its form, and as upon the vent
    Of rustic pipe the wind that enters it,

Even thus, relieved from the delay of waiting,
    That murmuring of the eagle mounted up
    Along its neck, as if it had been hollow.

There it became a voice, and issued thence
    From out its beak, in such a form of words
    As the heart waited for wherein I wrote them.

“The part in me which sees and bears the sun
    In mortal eagles,” it began to me,
    “Now fixedly must needs be looked upon;

For of the fires of which I make my figure,
    Those whence the eye doth sparkle in my head
    Of all their orders the supremest are.

He who is shining in the midst as pupil
    Was once the singer of the Holy Spirit,
    Who bore the ark from city unto city;

Now knoweth he the merit of his song,
    In so far as effect of his own counsel,
    By the reward which is commensurate.

Of five, that make a circle for my brow,
    He that approacheth nearest to my beak
    Did the poor widow for her son console;

Now knoweth he how dearly it doth cost
    Not following Christ, by the experience
    Of this sweet life and of its opposite.

He who comes next in the circumference
    Of which I speak, upon its highest arc,
    Did death postpone by penitence sincere;

Now knoweth he that the eternal judgment
    Suffers no change, albeit worthy prayer
    Maketh below to-morrow of to-day.

The next who follows, with the laws and me,
    Under the good intent that bore bad fruit
    Became a Greek by ceding to the pastor;

Now knoweth he how all the ill deduced
    From his good action is not harmful to him,
    Although the world thereby may be destroyed.

And he, whom in the downward arc thou seest,
    Guglielmo was, whom the same land deplores
    That weepeth Charles and Frederick yet alive;

Now knoweth he how heaven enamoured is
    With a just king; and in the outward show
    Of his effulgence he reveals it still.

Who would believe, down in the errant world,
    That e’er the Trojan Ripheus in this round
    Could be the fifth one of the holy lights?

Now knoweth he enough of what the world
    Has not the power to see of grace divine,
    Although his sight may not discern the bottom.”

Like as a lark that in the air expatiates,
    First singing and then silent with content
    Of the last sweetness that doth satisfy her,

Such seemed to me the image of the imprint
    Of the eternal pleasure, by whose will
    Doth everything become the thing it is.

And notwithstanding to my doubt I was
    As glass is to the colour that invests it,
    To wait the time in silence it endured not,

But forth from out my mouth, “What things are these?”
    Extorted with the force of its own weight;
    Whereat I saw great joy of coruscation.

Thereafterward with eye still more enkindled
    The blessed standard made to me reply,
    To keep me not in wonderment suspended:

“I see that thou believest in these things
    Because I say them, but thou seest not how;
    So that, although believed in, they are hidden.

Thou doest as he doth who a thing by name
    Well apprehendeth, but its quiddity
    Cannot perceive, unless another show it.

‘Regnum coelorum’ suffereth violence
    From fervent love, and from that living hope
    That overcometh the Divine volition;

Not in the guise that man o’ercometh man,
    But conquers it because it will be conquered,
    And conquered conquers by benignity.

The first life of the eyebrow and the fifth
    Cause thee astonishment, because with them
    Thou seest the region of the angels painted.

They passed not from their bodies, as thou thinkest,
    Gentiles, but Christians in the steadfast faith
    Of feet that were to suffer and had suffered.

For one from Hell, where no one e’er turns back
    Unto good will, returned unto his bones,
    And that of living hope was the reward,—

Of living hope, that placed its efficacy
    In prayers to God made to resuscitate him,
    So that ’twere possible to move his will.

The glorious soul concerning which I speak,
    Returning to the flesh, where brief its stay,
    Believed in Him who had the power to aid it;

And, in believing, kindled to such fire
    Of genuine love, that at the second death
    Worthy it was to come unto this joy.

The other one, through grace, that from so deep
    A fountain wells that never hath the eye
    Of any creature reached its primal wave,

Set all his love below on righteousness;
    Wherefore from grace to grace did God unclose
    His eye to our redemption yet to be,

Whence he believed therein, and suffered not
    From that day forth the stench of paganism,
    And he reproved therefor the folk perverse.

Those Maidens three, whom at the right-hand wheel
    Thou didst behold, were unto him for baptism
    More than a thousand years before baptizing.

O thou predestination, how remote
    Thy root is from the aspect of all those
    Who the First Cause do not behold entire!

And you, O mortals! hold yourselves restrained
    In judging; for ourselves, who look on God,
    We do not know as yet all the elect;

And sweet to us is such a deprivation,
    Because our good in this good is made perfect,
    That whatsoe’er God wills, we also will.”

After this manner by that shape divine,
    To make clear in me my short-sightedness,
    Was given to me a pleasant medicine;

And as good singer a good lutanist
    Accompanies with vibrations of the chords,
    Whereby more pleasantness the song acquires,

So, while it spake, do I remember me
    That I beheld both of those blessed lights,
    Even as the winking of the eyes concords,

Moving unto the words their little flames.







Already on my Lady’s face mine eyes
    Again were fastened, and with these my mind,
    And from all other purpose was withdrawn;

And she smiled not; but “If I were to smile,”
    She unto me began, “thou wouldst become
    Like Semele, when she was turned to ashes.

Because my beauty, that along the stairs
    Of the eternal palace more enkindles,
    As thou hast seen, the farther we ascend,

If it were tempered not, is so resplendent
    That all thy mortal power in its effulgence
    Would seem a leaflet that the thunder crushes.

We are uplifted to the seventh splendour,
    That underneath the burning Lion’s breast
    Now radiates downward mingled with his power.

Fix in direction of thine eyes the mind,
    And make of them a mirror for the figure
    That in this mirror shall appear to thee.”

He who could know what was the pasturage
    My sight had in that blessed countenance,
    When I transferred me to another care,

Would recognize how grateful was to me
    Obedience unto my celestial escort,
    By counterpoising one side with the other.

Within the crystal which, around the world
    Revolving, bears the name of its dear leader,
    Under whom every wickedness lay dead,

Coloured like gold, on which the sunshine gleams,
    A stairway I beheld to such a height
    Uplifted, that mine eye pursued it not.

Likewise beheld I down the steps descending
    So many splendours, that I thought each light
    That in the heaven appears was there diffused.

And as accordant with their natural custom
    The rooks together at the break of day
    Bestir themselves to warm their feathers cold;

Then some of them fly off without return,
    Others come back to where they started from,
    And others, wheeling round, still keep at home;

Such fashion it appeared to me was there
    Within the sparkling that together came,
    As soon as on a certain step it struck,

And that which nearest unto us remained
    Became so clear, that in my thought I said,
    “Well I perceive the love thou showest me;

But she, from whom I wait the how and when
    Of speech and silence, standeth still; whence I
    Against desire do well if I ask not.”

She thereupon, who saw my silentness
    In the sight of Him who seeth everything,
    Said unto me, “Let loose thy warm desire.”

And I began: “No merit of my own
    Renders me worthy of response from thee;
    But for her sake who granteth me the asking,

Thou blessed life that dost remain concealed
    In thy beatitude, make known to me
    The cause which draweth thee so near my side;

And tell me why is silent in this wheel
    The dulcet symphony of Paradise,
    That through the rest below sounds so devoutly.”

“Thou hast thy hearing mortal as thy sight,”
    It answer made to me; “they sing not here,
    For the same cause that Beatrice has not smiled.

Thus far adown the holy stairway’s steps
    Have I descended but to give thee welcome
    With words, and with the light that mantles me;

Nor did more love cause me to be more ready,
    For love as much and more up there is burning,
    As doth the flaming manifest to thee.

But the high charity, that makes us servants
    Prompt to the counsel which controls the world,
    Allotteth here, even as thou dost observe.”

“I see full well,” said I, “O sacred lamp!
    How love unfettered in this court sufficeth
    To follow the eternal Providence;

But this is what seems hard for me to see,
    Wherefore predestinate wast thou alone
    Unto this office from among thy consorts.”

No sooner had I come to the last word,
    Than of its middle made the light a centre,
    Whirling itself about like a swift millstone.

When answer made the love that was therein:
    “On me directed is a light divine,
    Piercing through this in which I am embosomed,

Of which the virtue with my sight conjoined
    Lifts me above myself so far, I see
    The supreme essence from which this is drawn.

Hence comes the joyfulness with which I flame,
    For to my sight, as far as it is clear,
    The clearness of the flame I equal make.

But that soul in the heaven which is most pure,
    That seraph which his eye on God most fixes,
    Could this demand of thine not satisfy;

Because so deeply sinks in the abyss
    Of the eternal statute what thou askest,
    From all created sight it is cut off.

And to the mortal world, when thou returnest,
    This carry back, that it may not presume
    Longer tow’rd such a goal to move its feet.

The mind, that shineth here, on earth doth smoke;
    From this observe how can it do below
    That which it cannot though the heaven assume it?”

Such limit did its words prescribe to me,
    The question I relinquished, and restricted
    Myself to ask it humbly who it was.

“Between two shores of Italy rise cliffs,
    And not far distant from thy native place,
    So high, the thunders far below them sound,

And form a ridge that Catria is called,
    ’Neath which is consecrate a hermitage
    Wont to be dedicate to worship only.”

Thus unto me the third speech recommenced,
    And then, continuing, it said: “Therein
    Unto God’s service I became so steadfast,

That feeding only on the juice of olives
    Lightly I passed away the heats and frosts,
    Contented in my thoughts contemplative.

That cloister used to render to these heavens
    Abundantly, and now is empty grown,
    So that perforce it soon must be revealed.

I in that place was Peter Damiano;
    And Peter the Sinner was I in the house
    Of Our Lady on the Adriatic shore.

Little of mortal life remained to me,
    When I was called and dragged forth to the hat
    Which shifteth evermore from bad to worse.

Came Cephas, and the mighty Vessel came
    Of the Holy Spirit, meagre and barefooted,
    Taking the food of any hostelry.

Now some one to support them on each side
    The modern shepherds need, and some to lead them,
    So heavy are they, and to hold their trains.

They cover up their palfreys with their cloaks,
    So that two beasts go underneath one skin;
    O Patience, that dost tolerate so much!”

At this voice saw I many little flames
    From step to step descending and revolving,
    And every revolution made them fairer.

Round about this one came they and stood still,
    And a cry uttered of so loud a sound,
    It here could find no parallel, nor I

Distinguished it, the thunder so o’ercame me.







Oppressed with stupor, I unto my guide
    Turned like a little child who always runs
    For refuge there where he confideth most;

And she, even as a mother who straightway
    Gives comfort to her pale and breathless boy
    With voice whose wont it is to reassure him,

Said to me: “Knowest thou not thou art in heaven,
    And knowest thou not that heaven is holy all
    And what is done here cometh from good zeal?

After what wise the singing would have changed thee
    And I by smiling, thou canst now imagine,
    Since that the cry has startled thee so much,

In which if thou hadst understood its prayers
    Already would be known to thee the vengeance
    Which thou shalt look upon before thou diest.

The sword above here smiteth not in haste
    Nor tardily, howe’er it seem to him
    Who fearing or desiring waits for it.

But turn thee round towards the others now,
    For very illustrious spirits shalt thou see,
    If thou thy sight directest as I say.”

As it seemed good to her mine eyes I turned,
    And saw a hundred spherules that together
    With mutual rays each other more embellished.

I stood as one who in himself represses
    The point of his desire, and ventures not
    To question, he so feareth the too much.

And now the largest and most luculent
    Among those pearls came forward, that it might
    Make my desire concerning it content.

Within it then I heard: “If thou couldst see
    Even as myself the charity that burns
    Among us, thy conceits would be expressed;

But, that by waiting thou mayst not come late
    To the high end, I will make answer even
    Unto the thought of which thou art so chary.

That mountain on whose slope Cassino stands
    Was frequented of old upon its summit
    By a deluded folk and ill-disposed;

And I am he who first up thither bore
    The name of Him who brought upon the earth
    The truth that so much sublimateth us.

And such abundant grace upon me shone
    That all the neighbouring towns I drew away
    From the impious worship that seduced the world.

These other fires, each one of them, were men
    Contemplative, enkindled by that heat
    Which maketh holy flowers and fruits spring up.

Here is Macarius, here is Romualdus,
    Here are my brethren, who within the cloisters
    Their footsteps stayed and kept a steadfast heart.”

And I to him: “The affection which thou showest
    Speaking with me, and the good countenance
    Which I behold and note in all your ardours,

In me have so my confidence dilated
    As the sun doth the rose, when it becomes
    As far unfolded as it hath the power.

Therefore I pray, and thou assure me, father,
    If I may so much grace receive, that I
    May thee behold with countenance unveiled.”

He thereupon: “Brother, thy high desire
    In the remotest sphere shall be fulfilled,
    Where are fulfilled all others and my own.

There perfect is, and ripened, and complete,
    Every desire; within that one alone
    Is every part where it has always been;

For it is not in space, nor turns on poles,
    And unto it our stairway reaches up,
    Whence thus from out thy sight it steals away.

Up to that height the Patriarch Jacob saw it
    Extending its supernal part, what time
    So thronged with angels it appeared to him.

But to ascend it now no one uplifts
    His feet from off the earth, and now my Rule
    Below remaineth for mere waste of paper.

The walls that used of old to be an Abbey
    Are changed to dens of robbers, and the cowls
    Are sacks filled full of miserable flour.

But heavy usury is not taken up
    So much against God’s pleasure as that fruit
    Which maketh so insane the heart of monks;

For whatsoever hath the Church in keeping
    Is for the folk that ask it in God’s name,
    Not for one’s kindred or for something worse.

The flesh of mortals is so very soft,
    That good beginnings down below suffice not
    From springing of the oak to bearing acorns.

Peter began with neither gold nor silver,
    And I with orison and abstinence,
    And Francis with humility his convent.

And if thou lookest at each one’s beginning,
    And then regardest whither he has run,
    Thou shalt behold the white changed into brown.

In verity the Jordan backward turned,
    And the sea’s fleeing, when God willed were more
    A wonder to behold, than succour here.”

Thus unto me he said; and then withdrew
    To his own band, and the band closed together;
    Then like a whirlwind all was upward rapt.

The gentle Lady urged me on behind them
    Up o’er that stairway by a single sign,
    So did her virtue overcome my nature;

Nor here below, where one goes up and down
    By natural law, was motion e’er so swift
    That it could be compared unto my wing.

Reader, as I may unto that devout
    Triumph return, on whose account I often
    For my transgressions weep and beat my breast,—

Thou hadst not thrust thy finger in the fire
    And drawn it out again, before I saw
    The sign that follows Taurus, and was in it.

O glorious stars, O light impregnated
    With mighty virtue, from which I acknowledge
    All of my genius, whatsoe’er it be,

With you was born, and hid himself with you,
    He who is father of all mortal life,
    When first I tasted of the Tuscan air;

And then when grace was freely given to me
    To enter the high wheel which turns you round,
    Your region was allotted unto me.

To you devoutly at this hour my soul
    Is sighing, that it virtue may acquire
    For the stern pass that draws it to itself.

“Thou art so near unto the last salvation,”
    Thus Beatrice began, “thou oughtest now
    To have thine eves unclouded and acute;

And therefore, ere thou enter farther in,
    Look down once more, and see how vast a world
    Thou hast already put beneath thy feet;

So that thy heart, as jocund as it may,
    Present itself to the triumphant throng
    That comes rejoicing through this rounded ether.”

I with my sight returned through one and all
    The sevenfold spheres, and I beheld this globe
    Such that I smiled at its ignoble semblance;

And that opinion I approve as best
    Which doth account it least; and he who thinks
    Of something else may truly be called just.

I saw the daughter of Latona shining
    Without that shadow, which to me was cause
    That once I had believed her rare and dense.

The aspect of thy son, Hyperion,
    Here I sustained, and saw how move themselves
    Around and near him Maia and Dione.

Thence there appeared the temperateness of Jove
    ’Twixt son and father, and to me was clear
    The change that of their whereabout they make;

And all the seven made manifest to me
    How great they are, and eke how swift they are,
    And how they are in distant habitations.

The threshing-floor that maketh us so proud,
    To me revolving with the eternal Twins,
    Was all apparent made from hill to harbour!

Then to the beauteous eyes mine eyes I turned.







Even as a bird, ’mid the beloved leaves,
    Quiet upon the nest of her sweet brood
    Throughout the night, that hideth all things from us,

Who, that she may behold their longed-for looks
    And find the food wherewith to nourish them,
    In which, to her, grave labours grateful are,

Anticipates the time on open spray
    And with an ardent longing waits the sun,
    Gazing intent as soon as breaks the dawn:

Even thus my Lady standing was, erect
    And vigilant, turned round towards the zone
    Underneath which the sun displays less haste;

So that beholding her distraught and wistful,
    Such I became as he is who desiring
    For something yearns, and hoping is appeased.

But brief the space from one When to the other;
    Of my awaiting, say I, and the seeing
    The welkin grow resplendent more and more.

And Beatrice exclaimed: “Behold the hosts
    Of Christ’s triumphal march, and all the fruit
    Harvested by the rolling of these spheres!”

It seemed to me her face was all aflame;
    And eyes she had so full of ecstasy
    That I must needs pass on without describing.

As when in nights serene of the full moon
    Smiles Trivia among the nymphs eternal
    Who paint the firmament through all its gulfs,

Saw I, above the myriads of lamps,
    A Sun that one and all of them enkindled,
    E’en as our own doth the supernal sights,

And through the living light transparent shone
    The lucent substance so intensely clear
    Into my sight, that I sustained it not.

O Beatrice, thou gentle guide and dear!
    To me she said: “What overmasters thee
    A virtue is from which naught shields itself.

There are the wisdom and the omnipotence
    That oped the thoroughfares ’twixt heaven and earth,
    For which there erst had been so long a yearning.”

As fire from out a cloud unlocks itself,
    Dilating so it finds not room therein,
    And down, against its nature, falls to earth,

So did my mind, among those aliments
    Becoming larger, issue from itself,
    And that which it became cannot remember.

“Open thine eyes, and look at what I am:
    Thou hast beheld such things, that strong enough
    Hast thou become to tolerate my smile.”

I was as one who still retains the feeling
    Of a forgotten vision, and endeavours
    In vain to bring it back into his mind,

When I this invitation heard, deserving
    Of so much gratitude, it never fades
    Out of the book that chronicles the past.

If at this moment sounded all the tongues
    That Polyhymnia and her sisters made
    Most lubrical with their delicious milk,

To aid me, to a thousandth of the truth
    It would not reach, singing the holy smile
    And how the holy aspect it illumed.

And therefore, representing Paradise,
    The sacred poem must perforce leap over,
    Even as a man who finds his way cut off;

But whoso thinketh of the ponderous theme,
    And of the mortal shoulder laden with it,
    Should blame it not, if under this it tremble.

It is no passage for a little boat
    This which goes cleaving the audacious prow,
    Nor for a pilot who would spare himself.

“Why doth my face so much enamour thee,
    That to the garden fair thou turnest not,
    Which under the rays of Christ is blossoming?

There is the Rose in which the Word Divine
    Became incarnate; there the lilies are
    By whose perfume the good way was discovered.”

Thus Beatrice; and I, who to her counsels
    Was wholly ready, once again betook me
    Unto the battle of the feeble brows.

As in the sunshine, that unsullied streams
    Through fractured cloud, ere now a meadow of flowers
    Mine eyes with shadow covered o’er have seen,

So troops of splendours manifold I saw
    Illumined from above with burning rays,
    Beholding not the source of the effulgence.

O power benignant that dost so imprint them!
    Thou didst exalt thyself to give more scope
    There to mine eyes, that were not strong enough.

The name of that fair flower I e’er invoke
    Morning and evening utterly enthralled
    My soul to gaze upon the greater fire.

And when in both mine eyes depicted were
    The glory and greatness of the living star
    Which there excelleth, as it here excelled,

Athwart the heavens a little torch descended
    Formed in a circle like a coronal,
    And cinctured it, and whirled itself about it.

Whatever melody most sweetly soundeth
    On earth, and to itself most draws the soul,
    Would seem a cloud that, rent asunder, thunders,

Compared unto the sounding of that lyre
    Wherewith was crowned the sapphire beautiful,
    Which gives the clearest heaven its sapphire hue.

“I am Angelic Love, that circle round
    The joy sublime which breathes from out the womb
    That was the hostelry of our Desire;

And I shall circle, Lady of Heaven, while
    Thou followest thy Son, and mak’st diviner
    The sphere supreme, because thou enterest there.”

Thus did the circulated melody
    Seal itself up; and all the other lights
    Were making to resound the name of Mary.

The regal mantle of the volumes all
    Of that world, which most fervid is and living
    With breath of God and with his works and ways,

Extended over us its inner border,
    So very distant, that the semblance of it
    There where I was not yet appeared to me.

Therefore mine eyes did not possess the power
    Of following the incoronated flame,
    Which mounted upward near to its own seed.

And as a little child, that towards its mother
    Stretches its arms, when it the milk has taken,
    Through impulse kindled into outward flame,

Each of those gleams of whiteness upward reached
    So with its summit, that the deep affection
    They had for Mary was revealed to me.

Thereafter they remained there in my sight,
    ‘Regina coeli’ singing with such sweetness,
    That ne’er from me has the delight departed.

O, what exuberance is garnered up
    Within those richest coffers, which had been
    Good husbandmen for sowing here below!

There they enjoy and live upon the treasure
    Which was acquired while weeping in the exile
    Of Babylon, wherein the gold was left.

There triumpheth, beneath the exalted Son
    Of God and Mary, in his victory,
    Both with the ancient council and the new,

He who doth keep the keys of such a glory.







“O company elect to the great supper
    Of the Lamb benedight, who feedeth you
    So that for ever full is your desire,

If by the grace of God this man foretaste
    Something of that which falleth from your table,
    Or ever death prescribe to him the time,

Direct your mind to his immense desire,
    And him somewhat bedew; ye drinking are
    For ever at the fount whence comes his thought.”

Thus Beatrice; and those souls beatified
    Transformed themselves to spheres on steadfast poles,
    Flaming intensely in the guise of comets.

And as the wheels in works of horologes
    Revolve so that the first to the beholder
    Motionless seems, and the last one to fly,

So in like manner did those carols, dancing
    In different measure, of their affluence
    Give me the gauge, as they were swift or slow.

From that one which I noted of most beauty
    Beheld I issue forth a fire so happy
    That none it left there of a greater brightness;

And around Beatrice three several times
    It whirled itself with so divine a song,
    My fantasy repeats it not to me;

Therefore the pen skips, and I write it not,
    Since our imagination for such folds,
    Much more our speech, is of a tint too glaring.

“O holy sister mine, who us implorest
    With such devotion, by thine ardent love
    Thou dost unbind me from that beautiful sphere!”

Thereafter, having stopped, the blessed fire
    Unto my Lady did direct its breath,
    Which spake in fashion as I here have said.

And she: “O light eterne of the great man
    To whom our Lord delivered up the keys
    He carried down of this miraculous joy,

This one examine on points light and grave,
    As good beseemeth thee, about the Faith
    By means of which thou on the sea didst walk.

If he love well, and hope well, and believe,
    From thee ’tis hid not; for thou hast thy sight
    There where depicted everything is seen.

But since this kingdom has made citizens
    By means of the true Faith, to glorify it
    ’Tis well he have the chance to speak thereof.”

As baccalaureate arms himself, and speaks not
    Until the master doth propose the question,
    To argue it, and not to terminate it,

So did I arm myself with every reason,
    While she was speaking, that I might be ready
    For such a questioner and such profession.

“Say, thou good Christian; manifest thyself;
    What is the Faith?” Whereat I raised my brow
    Unto that light wherefrom was this breathed forth.

Then turned I round to Beatrice, and she
    Prompt signals made to me that I should pour
    The water forth from my internal fountain.

“May grace, that suffers me to make confession,”
    Began I, “to the great centurion,
    Cause my conceptions all to be explicit!”

And I continued: “As the truthful pen,
    Father, of thy dear brother wrote of it,
    Who put with thee Rome into the good way,

Faith is the substance of the things we hope for,
    And evidence of those that are not seen;
    And this appears to me its quiddity.”

Then heard I: “Very rightly thou perceivest,
    If well thou understandest why he placed it
    With substances and then with evidences.”

And I thereafterward: “The things profound,
    That here vouchsafe to me their apparition,
    Unto all eyes below are so concealed,

That they exist there only in belief,
    Upon the which is founded the high hope,
    And hence it takes the nature of a substance.

And it behoveth us from this belief
    To reason without having other sight,
    And hence it has the nature of evidence.”

Then heard I: “If whatever is acquired
    Below by doctrine were thus understood,
    No sophist’s subtlety would there find place.”

Thus was breathed forth from that enkindled love;
    Then added: “Very well has been gone over
    Already of this coin the alloy and weight;

But tell me if thou hast it in thy purse?”
    And I: “Yes, both so shining and so round
    That in its stamp there is no peradventure.”

Thereafter issued from the light profound
    That there resplendent was: “This precious jewel,
    Upon the which is every virtue founded,

Whence hadst thou it?” And I: “The large outpouring
    Of Holy Spirit, which has been diffused
    Upon the ancient parchments and the new,

A syllogism is, which proved it to me
    With such acuteness, that, compared therewith,
    All demonstration seems to me obtuse.”

And then I heard: “The ancient and the new
    Postulates, that to thee are so conclusive,
    Why dost thou take them for the word divine?”

And I: “The proofs, which show the truth to me,
    Are the works subsequent, whereunto Nature
    Ne’er heated iron yet, nor anvil beat.”

’Twas answered me: “Say, who assureth thee
    That those works ever were? the thing itself
    That must be proved, nought else to thee affirms it.”

“Were the world to Christianity converted,”
    I said, “withouten miracles, this one
    Is such, the rest are not its hundredth part;

Because that poor and fasting thou didst enter
    Into the field to sow there the good plant,
    Which was a vine and has become a thorn!”

This being finished, the high, holy Court
    Resounded through the spheres, “One God we praise!”
    In melody that there above is chanted.

And then that Baron, who from branch to branch,
    Examining, had thus conducted me,
    Till the extremest leaves we were approaching,

Again began: “The Grace that dallying
    Plays with thine intellect thy mouth has opened,
    Up to this point, as it should opened be,

So that I do approve what forth emerged;
    But now thou must express what thou believest,
    And whence to thy belief it was presented.”

“O holy father, spirit who beholdest
    What thou believedst so that thou o’ercamest,
    Towards the sepulchre, more youthful feet,”

Began I, “thou dost wish me in this place
    The form to manifest of my prompt belief,
    And likewise thou the cause thereof demandest.

And I respond: In one God I believe,
    Sole and eterne, who moveth all the heavens
    With love and with desire, himself unmoved;

And of such faith not only have I proofs
    Physical and metaphysical, but gives them
    Likewise the truth that from this place rains down

Through Moses, through the Prophets and the Psalms,
    Through the Evangel, and through you, who wrote
    After the fiery Spirit sanctified you;

In Persons three eterne believe, and these
    One essence I believe, so one and trine
    They bear conjunction both with ‘sunt’ and ‘est.’

With the profound condition and divine
    Which now I touch upon, doth stamp my mind
    Ofttimes the doctrine evangelical.

This the beginning is, this is the spark
    Which afterwards dilates to vivid flame,
    And, like a star in heaven, is sparkling in me.”

Even as a lord who hears what pleaseth him
    His servant straight embraces, gratulating
    For the good news as soon as he is silent;

So, giving me its benediction, singing,
    Three times encircled me, when I was silent,
    The apostolic light, at whose command

I spoken had, in speaking I so pleased him.







If e’er it happen that the Poem Sacred,
    To which both heaven and earth have set their hand,
    So that it many a year hath made me lean,

O’ercome the cruelty that bars me out
    From the fair sheepfold, where a lamb I slumbered,
    An enemy to the wolves that war upon it,

With other voice forthwith, with other fleece
    Poet will I return, and at my font
    Baptismal will I take the laurel crown;

Because into the Faith that maketh known
    All souls to God there entered I, and then
    Peter for her sake thus my brow encircled.

Thereafterward towards us moved a light
    Out of that band whence issued the first-fruits
    Which of his vicars Christ behind him left,

And then my Lady, full of ecstasy,
    Said unto me: “Look, look! behold the Baron
    For whom below Galicia is frequented.”

In the same way as, when a dove alights
    Near his companion, both of them pour forth,
    Circling about and murmuring, their affection,

So one beheld I by the other grand
    Prince glorified to be with welcome greeted,
    Lauding the food that there above is eaten.

But when their gratulations were complete,
    Silently ‘coram me’ each one stood still,
    So incandescent it o’ercame my sight.

Smiling thereafterwards, said Beatrice:
    “Illustrious life, by whom the benefactions
    Of our Basilica have been described,

Make Hope resound within this altitude;
    Thou knowest as oft thou dost personify it
    As Jesus to the three gave greater clearness.”—

“Lift up thy head, and make thyself assured;
    For what comes hither from the mortal world
    Must needs be ripened in our radiance.”

This comfort came to me from the second fire;
    Wherefore mine eyes I lifted to the hills,
    Which bent them down before with too great weight.

“Since, through his grace, our Emperor wills that thou
    Shouldst find thee face to face, before thy death,
    In the most secret chamber, with his Counts,

So that, the truth beholden of this court,
    Hope, which below there rightfully enamours,
    Thereby thou strengthen in thyself and others,

Say what it is, and how is flowering with it
    Thy mind, and say from whence it came to thee.”
    Thus did the second light again continue.

And the Compassionate, who piloted
    The plumage of my wings in such high flight,
    Did in reply anticipate me thus:

“No child whatever the Church Militant
    Of greater hope possesses, as is written
    In that Sun which irradiates all our band;

Therefore it is conceded him from Egypt
    To come into Jerusalem to see,
    Or ever yet his warfare be completed.

The two remaining points, that not for knowledge
    Have been demanded, but that he report
    How much this virtue unto thee is pleasing,

To him I leave; for hard he will not find them,
    Nor of self-praise; and let him answer them;
    And may the grace of God in this assist him!”

As a disciple, who his teacher follows,
    Ready and willing, where he is expert,
    That his proficiency may be displayed,

“Hope,” said I, “is the certain expectation
    Of future glory, which is the effect
    Of grace divine and merit precedent.

From many stars this light comes unto me;
    But he instilled it first into my heart
    Who was chief singer unto the chief captain.

‘Sperent in te,’ in the high Theody
    He sayeth, ‘those who know thy name;’ and who
    Knoweth it not, if he my faith possess?

Thou didst instil me, then, with his instilling
    In the Epistle, so that I am full,
    And upon others rain again your rain.”

While I was speaking, in the living bosom
    Of that combustion quivered an effulgence,
    Sudden and frequent, in the guise of lightning;

Then breathed: “The love wherewith I am inflamed
    Towards the virtue still which followed me
    Unto the palm and issue of the field,

Wills that I breathe to thee that thou delight
    In her; and grateful to me is thy telling
    Whatever things Hope promises to thee.”

And I: “The ancient Scriptures and the new
    The mark establish, and this shows it me,
    Of all the souls whom God hath made his friends.

Isaiah saith, that each one garmented
    In his own land shall be with twofold garments,
    And his own land is this delightful life.

Thy brother, too, far more explicitly,
    There where he treateth of the robes of white,
    This revelation manifests to us.”

And first, and near the ending of these words,
    “Sperent in te” from over us was heard,
    To which responsive answered all the carols.

Thereafterward a light among them brightened,
    So that, if Cancer one such crystal had,
    Winter would have a month of one sole day.

And as uprises, goes, and enters the dance
    A winsome maiden, only to do honour
    To the new bride, and not from any failing,

Even thus did I behold the brightened splendour
    Approach the two, who in a wheel revolved
    As was beseeming to their ardent love.

Into the song and music there it entered;
    And fixed on them my Lady kept her look,
    Even as a bride silent and motionless.

“This is the one who lay upon the breast
    Of him our Pelican; and this is he
    To the great office from the cross elected.”

My Lady thus; but therefore none the more
    Did move her sight from its attentive gaze
    Before or afterward these words of hers.

Even as a man who gazes, and endeavours
    To see the eclipsing of the sun a little,
    And who, by seeing, sightless doth become,

So I became before that latest fire,
    While it was said, “Why dost thou daze thyself
    To see a thing which here hath no existence?

Earth in the earth my body is, and shall be
    With all the others there, until our number
    With the eternal proposition tallies.

With the two garments in the blessed cloister
    Are the two lights alone that have ascended:
    And this shalt thou take back into your world.”

And at this utterance the flaming circle
    Grew quiet, with the dulcet intermingling
    Of sound that by the trinal breath was made,

As to escape from danger or fatigue
    The oars that erst were in the water beaten
    Are all suspended at a whistle’s sound.

Ah, how much in my mind was I disturbed,
    When I turned round to look on Beatrice,
    That her I could not see, although I was

Close at her side and in the Happy World!






While I was doubting for my vision quenched,
    Out of the flame refulgent that had quenched it
    Issued a breathing, that attentive made me,

Saying: “While thou recoverest the sense
    Of seeing which in me thou hast consumed,
    ’Tis well that speaking thou shouldst compensate it.

Begin then, and declare to what thy soul
    Is aimed, and count it for a certainty,
    Sight is in thee bewildered and not dead;

Because the Lady, who through this divine
    Region conducteth thee, has in her look
    The power the hand of Ananias had.”

I said: “As pleaseth her, or soon or late
    Let the cure come to eyes that portals were
    When she with fire I ever burn with entered.

The Good, that gives contentment to this Court,
    The Alpha and Omega is of all
    The writing that love reads me low or loud.”

The selfsame voice, that taken had from me
    The terror of the sudden dazzlement,
    To speak still farther put it in my thought;

And said: “In verity with finer sieve
    Behoveth thee to sift; thee it behoveth
    To say who aimed thy bow at such a target.”

And I: “By philosophic arguments,
    And by authority that hence descends,
    Such love must needs imprint itself in me;

For Good, so far as good, when comprehended
    Doth straight enkindle love, and so much greater
    As more of goodness in itself it holds;

Then to that Essence (whose is such advantage
    That every good which out of it is found
    Is nothing but a ray of its own light)

More than elsewhither must the mind be moved
    Of every one, in loving, who discerns
    The truth in which this evidence is founded.

Such truth he to my intellect reveals
    Who demonstrates to me the primal love
    Of all the sempiternal substances.

The voice reveals it of the truthful Author,
    Who says to Moses, speaking of Himself,
    ‘I will make all my goodness pass before thee.’

Thou too revealest it to me, beginning
    The loud Evangel, that proclaims the secret
    Of heaven to earth above all other edict.”

And I heard say: “By human intellect
    And by authority concordant with it,
    Of all thy loves reserve for God the highest.

But say again if other cords thou feelest,
    Draw thee towards Him, that thou mayst proclaim
    With how many teeth this love is biting thee.”

The holy purpose of the Eagle of Christ
    Not latent was, nay, rather I perceived
    Whither he fain would my profession lead.

Therefore I recommenced: “All of those bites
    Which have the power to turn the heart to God
    Unto my charity have been concurrent.

The being of the world, and my own being,
    The death which He endured that I may live,
    And that which all the faithful hope, as I do,

With the forementioned vivid consciousness
    Have drawn me from the sea of love perverse,
    And of the right have placed me on the shore.

The leaves, wherewith embowered is all the garden
    Of the Eternal Gardener, do I love
    As much as he has granted them of good.”

As soon as I had ceased, a song most sweet
    Throughout the heaven resounded, and my Lady
    Said with the others, “Holy, holy, holy!”

And as at some keen light one wakes from sleep
    By reason of the visual spirit that runs
    Unto the splendour passed from coat to coat,

And he who wakes abhorreth what he sees,
    So all unconscious is his sudden waking,
    Until the judgment cometh to his aid,

So from before mine eyes did Beatrice
    Chase every mote with radiance of her own,
    That cast its light a thousand miles and more.

Whence better after than before I saw,
    And in a kind of wonderment I asked
    About a fourth light that I saw with us.

And said my Lady: “There within those rays
    Gazes upon its Maker the first soul
    That ever the first virtue did create.”

Even as the bough that downward bends its top
    At transit of the wind, and then is lifted
    By its own virtue, which inclines it upward,

Likewise did I, the while that she was speaking,
    Being amazed, and then I was made bold
    By a desire to speak wherewith I burned.

And I began: “O apple, that mature
    Alone hast been produced, O ancient father,
    To whom each wife is daughter and daughter-in-law,

Devoutly as I can I supplicate thee
    That thou wouldst speak to me; thou seest my wish;
    And I, to hear thee quickly, speak it not.”

Sometimes an animal, when covered, struggles
    So that his impulse needs must be apparent,
    By reason of the wrappage following it;

And in like manner the primeval soul
    Made clear to me athwart its covering
    How jubilant it was to give me pleasure.

Then breathed: “Without thy uttering it to me,
    Thine inclination better I discern
    Than thou whatever thing is surest to thee;

For I behold it in the truthful mirror,
    That of Himself all things parhelion makes,
    And none makes Him parhelion of itself.

Thou fain wouldst hear how long ago God placed me
    Within the lofty garden, where this Lady
    Unto so long a stairway thee disposed.

And how long to mine eyes it was a pleasure,
    And of the great disdain the proper cause,
    And the language that I used and that I made.

Now, son of mine, the tasting of the tree
    Not in itself was cause of so great exile,
    But solely the o’erstepping of the bounds.

There, whence thy Lady moved Virgilius,
    Four thousand and three hundred and two circuits
    Made by the sun, this Council I desired;

And him I saw return to all the lights
    Of his highway nine hundred times and thirty,
    Whilst I upon the earth was tarrying.

The language that I spake was quite extinct
    Before that in the work interminable
    The people under Nimrod were employed;

For nevermore result of reasoning
    (Because of human pleasure that doth change,
    Obedient to the heavens) was durable.

A natural action is it that man speaks;
    But whether thus or thus, doth nature leave
    To your own art, as seemeth best to you.

Ere I descended to the infernal anguish,
    ‘El’ was on earth the name of the Chief Good,
    From whom comes all the joy that wraps me round

‘Eli’ he then was called, and that is proper,
    Because the use of men is like a leaf
    On bough, which goeth and another cometh.

Upon the mount that highest o’er the wave
    Rises was I, in life or pure or sinful,
    From the first hour to that which is the second,

As the sun changes quadrant, to the sixth.”







“Glory be to the Father, to the Son,
    And Holy Ghost!” all Paradise began,
    So that the melody inebriate made me.

What I beheld seemed unto me a smile
    Of the universe; for my inebriation
    Found entrance through the hearing and the sight.

O joy! O gladness inexpressible!
    O perfect life of love and peacefulness!
    O riches without hankering secure!

Before mine eyes were standing the four torches
    Enkindled, and the one that first had come
    Began to make itself more luminous;

And even such in semblance it became
    As Jupiter would become, if he and Mars
    Were birds, and they should interchange their feathers.

That Providence, which here distributeth
    Season and service, in the blessed choir
    Had silence upon every side imposed.

When I heard say: “If I my colour change,
    Marvel not at it; for while I am speaking
    Thou shalt behold all these their colour change.

He who usurps upon the earth my place,
    My place, my place, which vacant has become
    Before the presence of the Son of God,

Has of my cemetery made a sewer
    Of blood and stench, whereby the Perverse One,
    Who fell from here, below there is appeased!”

With the same colour which, through sun adverse,
    Painteth the clouds at evening or at morn,
    Beheld I then the whole of heaven suffused.

And as a modest woman, who abides
    Sure of herself, and at another’s failing,
    From listening only, timorous becomes,

Even thus did Beatrice change countenance;
    And I believe in heaven was such eclipse,
    When suffered the supreme Omnipotence;

Thereafterward proceeded forth his words
    With voice so much transmuted from itself,
    The very countenance was not more changed.

“The spouse of Christ has never nurtured been
    On blood of mine, of Linus and of Cletus,
    To be made use of in acquest of gold;

But in acquest of this delightful life
    Sixtus and Pius, Urban and Calixtus,
    After much lamentation, shed their blood.

Our purpose was not, that on the right hand
    Of our successors should in part be seated
    The Christian folk, in part upon the other;

Nor that the keys which were to me confided
    Should e’er become the escutcheon on a banner,
    That should wage war on those who are baptized;

Nor I be made the figure of a seal
    To privileges venal and mendacious,
    Whereat I often redden and flash with fire.

In garb of shepherds the rapacious wolves
    Are seen from here above o’er all the pastures!
    O wrath of God, why dost thou slumber still?

To drink our blood the Caorsines and Gascons
    Are making ready. O thou good beginning,
    Unto how vile an end must thou needs fall!

But the high Providence, that with Scipio
    At Rome the glory of the world defended,
    Will speedily bring aid, as I conceive;

And thou, my son, who by thy mortal weight
    Shalt down return again, open thy mouth;
    What I conceal not, do not thou conceal.”

As with its frozen vapours downward falls
    In flakes our atmosphere, what time the horn
    Of the celestial Goat doth touch the sun,

Upward in such array saw I the ether
    Become, and flaked with the triumphant vapours,
    Which there together with us had remained.

My sight was following up their semblances,
    And followed till the medium, by excess,
    The passing farther onward took from it;

Whereat the Lady, who beheld me freed
    From gazing upward, said to me: “Cast down
    Thy sight, and see how far thou art turned round.”

Since the first time that I had downward looked,
    I saw that I had moved through the whole arc
    Which the first climate makes from midst to end;

So that I saw the mad track of Ulysses
    Past Gades, and this side, well nigh the shore
    Whereon became Europa a sweet burden.

And of this threshing-floor the site to me
    Were more unveiled, but the sun was proceeding
    Under my feet, a sign and more removed.

My mind enamoured, which is dallying
    At all times with my Lady, to bring back
    To her mine eyes was more than ever ardent.

And if or Art or Nature has made bait
    To catch the eyes and so possess the mind,
    In human flesh or in its portraiture,

All joined together would appear as nought
    To the divine delight which shone upon me
    When to her smiling face I turned me round.

The virtue that her look endowed me with
    From the fair nest of Leda tore me forth,
    And up into the swiftest heaven impelled me.

Its parts exceeding full of life and lofty
    Are all so uniform, I cannot say
    Which Beatrice selected for my place.

But she, who was aware of my desire,
    Began, the while she smiled so joyously
    That God seemed in her countenance to rejoice:

“The nature of that motion, which keeps quiet
    The centre and all the rest about it moves,
    From hence begins as from its starting point.

And in this heaven there is no other Where
    Than in the Mind Divine, wherein is kindled
    The love that turns it, and the power it rains.

Within a circle light and love embrace it,
    Even as this doth the others, and that precinct
    He who encircles it alone controls.

Its motion is not by another meted,
    But all the others measured are by this,
    As ten is by the half and by the fifth.

And in what manner time in such a pot
    May have its roots, and in the rest its leaves,
    Now unto thee can manifest be made.

O Covetousness, that mortals dost ingulf
    Beneath thee so, that no one hath the power
    Of drawing back his eyes from out thy waves!

Full fairly blossoms in mankind the will;
    But the uninterrupted rain converts
    Into abortive wildings the true plums.

Fidelity and innocence are found
    Only in children; afterwards they both
    Take flight or e’er the cheeks with down are covered.

One, while he prattles still, observes the fasts,
    Who, when his tongue is loosed, forthwith devours
    Whatever food under whatever moon;

Another, while he prattles, loves and listens
    Unto his mother, who when speech is perfect
    Forthwith desires to see her in her grave.

Even thus is swarthy made the skin so white
    In its first aspect of the daughter fair
    Of him who brings the morn, and leaves the night.

Thou, that it may not be a marvel to thee,
    Think that on earth there is no one who governs;
    Whence goes astray the human family.

Ere January be unwintered wholly
    By the centesimal on earth neglected,
    Shall these supernal circles roar so loud

The tempest that has been so long awaited
    Shall whirl the poops about where are the prows;
    So that the fleet shall run its course direct,

And the true fruit shall follow on the flower.”







After the truth against the present life
    Of miserable mortals was unfolded
    By her who doth imparadise my mind,

As in a looking-glass a taper’s flame
    He sees who from behind is lighted by it,
    Before he has it in his sight or thought,

And turns him round to see if so the glass
    Tell him the truth, and sees that it accords
    Therewith as doth a music with its metre,

In similar wise my memory recollecteth
    That I did, looking into those fair eyes,
    Of which Love made the springes to ensnare me.

And as I turned me round, and mine were touched
    By that which is apparent in that volume,
    Whenever on its gyre we gaze intent,

A point beheld I, that was raying out
    Light so acute, the sight which it enkindles
    Must close perforce before such great acuteness.

And whatsoever star seems smallest here
    Would seem to be a moon, if placed beside it.
    As one star with another star is placed.

Perhaps at such a distance as appears
    A halo cincturing the light that paints it,
    When densest is the vapour that sustains it,

Thus distant round the point a circle of fire
    So swiftly whirled, that it would have surpassed
    Whatever motion soonest girds the world;

And this was by another circumcinct,
    That by a third, the third then by a fourth,
    By a fifth the fourth, and then by a sixth the fifth;

The seventh followed thereupon in width
    So ample now, that Juno’s messenger
    Entire would be too narrow to contain it.

Even so the eighth and ninth; and every one
    More slowly moved, according as it was
    In number distant farther from the first.

And that one had its flame most crystalline
    From which less distant was the stainless spark,
    I think because more with its truth imbued.

My Lady, who in my anxiety
    Beheld me much perplexed, said: “From that point
    Dependent is the heaven and nature all.

Behold that circle most conjoined to it,
    And know thou, that its motion is so swift
    Through burning love whereby it is spurred on.”

And I to her: “If the world were arranged
    In the order which I see in yonder wheels,
    What’s set before me would have satisfied me;

But in the world of sense we can perceive
    That evermore the circles are diviner
    As they are from the centre more remote

Wherefore if my desire is to be ended
    In this miraculous and angelic temple,
    That has for confines only love and light,

To hear behoves me still how the example
    And the exemplar go not in one fashion,
    Since for myself in vain I contemplate it.”

“If thine own fingers unto such a knot
    Be insufficient, it is no great wonder,
    So hard hath it become for want of trying.”

My Lady thus; then said she: “Do thou take
    What I shall tell thee, if thou wouldst be sated,
    And exercise on that thy subtlety.

The circles corporal are wide and narrow
    According to the more or less of virtue
    Which is distributed through all their parts.

The greater goodness works the greater weal,
    The greater weal the greater body holds,
    If perfect equally are all its parts.

Therefore this one which sweeps along with it
    The universe sublime, doth correspond
    Unto the circle which most loves and knows.

On which account, if thou unto the virtue
    Apply thy measure, not to the appearance
    Of substances that unto thee seem round,

Thou wilt behold a marvellous agreement,
    Of more to greater, and of less to smaller,
    In every heaven, with its Intelligence.”

Even as remaineth splendid and serene
    The hemisphere of air, when Boreas
    Is blowing from that cheek where he is mildest,

Because is purified and resolved the rack
    That erst disturbed it, till the welkin laughs
    With all the beauties of its pageantry;

Thus did I likewise, after that my Lady
    Had me provided with her clear response,
    And like a star in heaven the truth was seen.

And soon as to a stop her words had come,
    Not otherwise does iron scintillate
    When molten, than those circles scintillated.

Their coruscation all the sparks repeated,
    And they so many were, their number makes
    More millions than the doubling of the chess.

I heard them sing hosanna choir by choir
    To the fixed point which holds them at the ‘Ubi,’
    And ever will, where they have ever been.

And she, who saw the dubious meditations
    Within my mind, “The primal circles,” said,
    “Have shown thee Seraphim and Cherubim.

Thus rapidly they follow their own bonds,
    To be as like the point as most they can,
    And can as far as they are high in vision.

Those other Loves, that round about them go,
    Thrones of the countenance divine are called,
    Because they terminate the primal Triad.

And thou shouldst know that they all have delight
    As much as their own vision penetrates
    The Truth, in which all intellect finds rest.

From this it may be seen how blessedness
    Is founded in the faculty which sees,
    And not in that which loves, and follows next;

And of this seeing merit is the measure,
    Which is brought forth by grace, and by good will;
    Thus on from grade to grade doth it proceed.

The second Triad, which is germinating
    In such wise in this sempiternal spring,
    That no nocturnal Aries despoils,

Perpetually hosanna warbles forth
    With threefold melody, that sounds in three
    Orders of joy, with which it is intrined.

The three Divine are in this hierarchy,
    First the Dominions, and the Virtues next;
    And the third order is that of the Powers.

Then in the dances twain penultimate
    The Principalities and Archangels wheel;
    The last is wholly of angelic sports.

These orders upward all of them are gazing,
    And downward so prevail, that unto God
    They all attracted are and all attract.

And Dionysius with so great desire
    To contemplate these Orders set himself,
    He named them and distinguished them as I do.

But Gregory afterwards dissented from him;
    Wherefore, as soon as he unclosed his eyes
    Within this heaven, he at himself did smile.

And if so much of secret truth a mortal
    Proffered on earth, I would not have thee marvel,
    For he who saw it here revealed it to him,

With much more of the truth about these circles.”







At what time both the children of Latona,
    Surmounted by the Ram and by the Scales,
    Together make a zone of the horizon,

As long as from the time the zenith holds them
    In equipoise, till from that girdle both
    Changing their hemisphere disturb the balance,

So long, her face depicted with a smile,
    Did Beatrice keep silence while she gazed
    Fixedly at the point which had o’ercome me.

Then she began: “I say, and I ask not
    What thou dost wish to hear, for I have seen it
    Where centres every When and every ‘Ubi.’

Not to acquire some good unto himself,
    Which is impossible, but that his splendour
    In its resplendency may say, ‘Subsisto,’

In his eternity outside of time,
    Outside all other limits, as it pleased him,
    Into new Loves the Eternal Love unfolded.

Nor as if torpid did he lie before;
    For neither after nor before proceeded
    The going forth of God upon these waters.

Matter and Form unmingled and conjoined
    Came into being that had no defect,
    E’en as three arrows from a three-stringed bow.

And as in glass, in amber, or in crystal
    A sunbeam flashes so, that from its coming
    To its full being is no interval,

So from its Lord did the triform effect
    Ray forth into its being all together,
    Without discrimination of beginning.

Order was con-created and constructed
    In substances, and summit of the world
    Were those wherein the pure act was produced.

Pure potentiality held the lowest part;
    Midway bound potentiality with act
    Such bond that it shall never be unbound.

Jerome has written unto you of angels
    Created a long lapse of centuries
    Or ever yet the other world was made;

But written is this truth in many places
    By writers of the Holy Ghost, and thou
    Shalt see it, if thou lookest well thereat.

And even reason seeth it somewhat,
    For it would not concede that for so long
    Could be the motors without their perfection.

Now dost thou know both where and when these Loves
    Created were, and how; so that extinct
    In thy desire already are three fires.

Nor could one reach, in counting, unto twenty
    So swiftly, as a portion of these angels
    Disturbed the subject of your elements.

The rest remained, and they began this art
    Which thou discernest, with so great delight
    That never from their circling do they cease.

The occasion of the fall was the accursed
    Presumption of that One, whom thou hast seen
    By all the burden of the world constrained.

Those whom thou here beholdest modest were
    To recognise themselves as of that goodness
    Which made them apt for so much understanding;

On which account their vision was exalted
    By the enlightening grace and their own merit,
    So that they have a full and steadfast will.

I would not have thee doubt, but certain be,
    ’Tis meritorious to receive this grace,
    According as the affection opens to it.

Now round about in this consistory
    Much mayst thou contemplate, if these my words
    Be gathered up, without all further aid.

But since upon the earth, throughout your schools,
    They teach that such is the angelic nature
    That it doth hear, and recollect, and will,

More will I say, that thou mayst see unmixed
    The truth that is confounded there below,
    Equivocating in such like prelections.

These substances, since in God’s countenance
    They jocund were, turned not away their sight
    From that wherefrom not anything is hidden;

Hence they have not their vision intercepted
    By object new, and hence they do not need
    To recollect, through interrupted thought.

So that below, not sleeping, people dream,
    Believing they speak truth, and not believing;
    And in the last is greater sin and shame.

Below you do not journey by one path
    Philosophising; so transporteth you
    Love of appearance and the thought thereof.

And even this above here is endured
    With less disdain, than when is set aside
    The Holy Writ, or when it is distorted.

They think not there how much of blood it costs
    To sow it in the world, and how he pleases
    Who in humility keeps close to it.

Each striveth for appearance, and doth make
    His own inventions; and these treated are
    By preachers, and the Evangel holds its peace.

One sayeth that the moon did backward turn,
    In the Passion of Christ, and interpose herself
    So that the sunlight reached not down below;

And lies; for of its own accord the light
    Hid itself; whence to Spaniards and to Indians,
    As to the Jews, did such eclipse respond.

Florence has not so many Lapi and Bindi
    As fables such as these, that every year
    Are shouted from the pulpit back and forth,

In such wise that the lambs, who do not know,
    Come back from pasture fed upon the wind,
    And not to see the harm doth not excuse them.

Christ did not to his first disciples say,
    ‘Go forth, and to the world preach idle tales,’
    But unto them a true foundation gave;

And this so loudly sounded from their lips,
    That, in the warfare to enkindle Faith,
    They made of the Evangel shields and lances.

Now men go forth with jests and drolleries
    To preach, and if but well the people laugh,
    The hood puffs out, and nothing more is asked.

But in the cowl there nestles such a bird,
    That, if the common people were to see it,
    They would perceive what pardons they confide in,

For which so great on earth has grown the folly,
    That, without proof of any testimony,
    To each indulgence they would flock together.

By this Saint Anthony his pig doth fatten,
    And many others, who are worse than pigs,
    Paying in money without mark of coinage.

But since we have digressed abundantly,
    Turn back thine eyes forthwith to the right path,
    So that the way be shortened with the time.

This nature doth so multiply itself
    In numbers, that there never yet was speech
    Nor mortal fancy that can go so far.

And if thou notest that which is revealed
    By Daniel, thou wilt see that in his thousands
    Number determinate is kept concealed.

The primal light, that all irradiates it,
    By modes as many is received therein,
    As are the splendours wherewith it is mated.

Hence, inasmuch as on the act conceptive
    The affection followeth, of love the sweetness
    Therein diversely fervid is or tepid.

The height behold now and the amplitude
    Of the eternal power, since it hath made
    Itself so many mirrors, where ’tis broken,

One in itself remaining as before.”







Perchance six thousand miles remote from us
    Is glowing the sixth hour, and now this world
    Inclines its shadow almost to a level,

When the mid-heaven begins to make itself
    So deep to us, that here and there a star
    Ceases to shine so far down as this depth,

And as advances bright exceedingly
    The handmaid of the sun, the heaven is closed
    Light after light to the most beautiful;

Not otherwise the Triumph, which for ever
    Plays round about the point that vanquished me,
    Seeming enclosed by what itself encloses,

Little by little from my vision faded;
    Whereat to turn mine eyes on Beatrice
    My seeing nothing and my love constrained me.

If what has hitherto been said of her
    Were all concluded in a single praise,
    Scant would it be to serve the present turn.

Not only does the beauty I beheld
    Transcend ourselves, but truly I believe
    Its Maker only may enjoy it all.

Vanquished do I confess me by this passage
    More than by problem of his theme was ever
    O’ercome the comic or the tragic poet;

For as the sun the sight that trembles most,
    Even so the memory of that sweet smile
    My mind depriveth of its very self.

From the first day that I beheld her face
    In this life, to the moment of this look,
    The sequence of my song has ne’er been severed;

But now perforce this sequence must desist
    From following her beauty with my verse,
    As every artist at his uttermost.

Such as I leave her to a greater fame
    Than any of my trumpet, which is bringing
    Its arduous matter to a final close,

With voice and gesture of a perfect leader
    She recommenced: “We from the greatest body
    Have issued to the heaven that is pure light;

Light intellectual replete with love,
    Love of true good replete with ecstasy,
    Ecstasy that transcendeth every sweetness.

Here shalt thou see the one host and the other
    Of Paradise, and one in the same aspects
    Which at the final judgment thou shalt see.”

Even as a sudden lightning that disperses
    The visual spirits, so that it deprives
    The eye of impress from the strongest objects,

Thus round about me flashed a living light,
    And left me swathed around with such a veil
    Of its effulgence, that I nothing saw.

“Ever the Love which quieteth this heaven
    Welcomes into itself with such salute,
    To make the candle ready for its flame.”

No sooner had within me these brief words
    An entrance found, than I perceived myself
    To be uplifted over my own power,

And I with vision new rekindled me,
    Such that no light whatever is so pure
    But that mine eyes were fortified against it.

And light I saw in fashion of a river
    Fulvid with its effulgence, ’twixt two banks
    Depicted with an admirable Spring.

Out of this river issued living sparks,
    And on all sides sank down into the flowers,
    Like unto rubies that are set in gold;

And then, as if inebriate with the odours,
    They plunged again into the wondrous torrent,
    And as one entered issued forth another.

“The high desire, that now inflames and moves thee
    To have intelligence of what thou seest,
    Pleaseth me all the more, the more it swells.

But of this water it behoves thee drink
    Before so great a thirst in thee be slaked.”
    Thus said to me the sunshine of mine eyes;

And added: “The river and the topazes
    Going in and out, and the laughing of the herbage,
    Are of their truth foreshadowing prefaces;

Not that these things are difficult in themselves,
    But the deficiency is on thy side,
    For yet thou hast not vision so exalted.”

There is no babe that leaps so suddenly
    With face towards the milk, if he awake
    Much later than his usual custom is,

As I did, that I might make better mirrors
    Still of mine eyes, down stooping to the wave
    Which flows that we therein be better made.

And even as the penthouse of mine eyelids
    Drank of it, it forthwith appeared to me
    Out of its length to be transformed to round.

Then as a folk who have been under masks
    Seem other than before, if they divest
    The semblance not their own they disappeared in,

Thus into greater pomp were changed for me
    The flowerets and the sparks, so that I saw
    Both of the Courts of Heaven made manifest.

O splendour of God! by means of which I saw
    The lofty triumph of the realm veracious,
    Give me the power to say how it I saw!

There is a light above, which visible
    Makes the Creator unto every creature,
    Who only in beholding Him has peace,

And it expands itself in circular form
    To such extent, that its circumference
    Would be too large a girdle for the sun.

The semblance of it is all made of rays
    Reflected from the top of Primal Motion,
    Which takes therefrom vitality and power.

And as a hill in water at its base
    Mirrors itself, as if to see its beauty
    When affluent most in verdure and in flowers,

So, ranged aloft all round about the light,
    Mirrored I saw in more ranks than a thousand
    All who above there have from us returned.

And if the lowest row collect within it
    So great a light, how vast the amplitude
    Is of this Rose in its extremest leaves!

My vision in the vastness and the height
    Lost not itself, but comprehended all
    The quantity and quality of that gladness.

There near and far nor add nor take away;
    For there where God immediately doth govern,
    The natural law in naught is relevant.

Into the yellow of the Rose Eternal
    That spreads, and multiplies, and breathes an odour
    Of praise unto the ever-vernal Sun,

As one who silent is and fain would speak,
    Me Beatrice drew on, and said: “Behold
    Of the white stoles how vast the convent is!

Behold how vast the circuit of our city!
    Behold our seats so filled to overflowing,
    That here henceforward are few people wanting!

On that great throne whereon thine eyes are fixed
    For the crown’s sake already placed upon it,
    Before thou suppest at this wedding feast

Shall sit the soul (that is to be Augustus
    On earth) of noble Henry, who shall come
    To redress Italy ere she be ready.

Blind covetousness, that casts its spell upon you,
    Has made you like unto the little child,
    Who dies of hunger and drives off the nurse.

And in the sacred forum then shall be
    A Prefect such, that openly or covert
    On the same road he will not walk with him.

But long of God he will not be endured
    In holy office; he shall be thrust down
    Where Simon Magus is for his deserts,

And make him of Alagna lower go!”







In fashion then as of a snow-white rose
    Displayed itself to me the saintly host,
    Whom Christ in his own blood had made his bride,

But the other host, that flying sees and sings
    The glory of Him who doth enamour it,
    And the goodness that created it so noble,

Even as a swarm of bees, that sinks in flowers
    One moment, and the next returns again
    To where its labour is to sweetness turned,

Sank into the great flower, that is adorned
    With leaves so many, and thence reascended
    To where its love abideth evermore.

Their faces had they all of living flame,
    And wings of gold, and all the rest so white
    No snow unto that limit doth attain.

From bench to bench, into the flower descending,
    They carried something of the peace and ardour
    Which by the fanning of their flanks they won.

Nor did the interposing ’twixt the flower
    And what was o’er it of such plenitude
    Of flying shapes impede the sight and splendour;

Because the light divine so penetrates
    The universe, according to its merit,
    That naught can be an obstacle against it.

This realm secure and full of gladsomeness,
    Crowded with ancient people and with modern,
    Unto one mark had all its look and love.

O Trinal Light, that in a single star
    Sparkling upon their sight so satisfies them,
    Look down upon our tempest here below!

If the barbarians, coming from some region
    That every day by Helice is covered,
    Revolving with her son whom she delights in,

Beholding Rome and all her noble works,
    Were wonder-struck, what time the Lateran
    Above all mortal things was eminent,—

I who to the divine had from the human,
    From time unto eternity, had come,
    From Florence to a people just and sane,

With what amazement must I have been filled!
    Truly between this and the joy, it was
    My pleasure not to hear, and to be mute.

And as a pilgrim who delighteth him
    In gazing round the temple of his vow,
    And hopes some day to retell how it was,

So through the living light my way pursuing
    Directed I mine eyes o’er all the ranks,
    Now up, now down, and now all round about.

Faces I saw of charity persuasive,
    Embellished by His light and their own smile,
    And attitudes adorned with every grace.

The general form of Paradise already
    My glance had comprehended as a whole,
    In no part hitherto remaining fixed,

And round I turned me with rekindled wish
    My Lady to interrogate of things
    Concerning which my mind was in suspense.

One thing I meant, another answered me;
    I thought I should see Beatrice, and saw
    An Old Man habited like the glorious people.

O’erflowing was he in his eyes and cheeks
    With joy benign, in attitude of pity
    As to a tender father is becoming.

And “She, where is she?” instantly I said;
    Whence he: “To put an end to thy desire,
    Me Beatrice hath sent from mine own place.

And if thou lookest up to the third round
    Of the first rank, again shalt thou behold her
    Upon the throne her merits have assigned her.”

Without reply I lifted up mine eyes,
    And saw her, as she made herself a crown
    Reflecting from herself the eternal rays.

Not from that region which the highest thunders
    Is any mortal eye so far removed,
    In whatsoever sea it deepest sinks,

As there from Beatrice my sight; but this
    Was nothing unto me; because her image
    Descended not to me by medium blurred.

“O Lady, thou in whom my hope is strong,
    And who for my salvation didst endure
    In Hell to leave the imprint of thy feet,

Of whatsoever things I have beheld,
    As coming from thy power and from thy goodness
    I recognise the virtue and the grace.

Thou from a slave hast brought me unto freedom,
    By all those ways, by all the expedients,
    Whereby thou hadst the power of doing it.

Preserve towards me thy magnificence,
    So that this soul of mine, which thou hast healed,
    Pleasing to thee be loosened from the body.”

Thus I implored; and she, so far away,
    Smiled, as it seemed, and looked once more at me;
    Then unto the eternal fountain turned.

And said the Old Man holy: “That thou mayst
    Accomplish perfectly thy journeying,
    Whereunto prayer and holy love have sent me,

Fly with thine eyes all round about this garden;
    For seeing it will discipline thy sight
    Farther to mount along the ray divine.

And she, the Queen of Heaven, for whom I burn
    Wholly with love, will grant us every grace,
    Because that I her faithful Bernard am.”

As he who peradventure from Croatia
    Cometh to gaze at our Veronica,
    Who through its ancient fame is never sated,

But says in thought, the while it is displayed,
    “My Lord, Christ Jesus, God of very God,
    Now was your semblance made like unto this?”

Even such was I while gazing at the living
    Charity of the man, who in this world
    By contemplation tasted of that peace.

“Thou son of grace, this jocund life,” began he,
    “Will not be known to thee by keeping ever
    Thine eyes below here on the lowest place;

But mark the circles to the most remote,
    Until thou shalt behold enthroned the Queen
    To whom this realm is subject and devoted.”

I lifted up mine eyes, and as at morn
    The oriental part of the horizon
    Surpasses that wherein the sun goes down,

Thus, as if going with mine eyes from vale
    To mount, I saw a part in the remoteness
    Surpass in splendour all the other front.

And even as there where we await the pole
    That Phaeton drove badly, blazes more
    The light, and is on either side diminished,

So likewise that pacific oriflamme
    Gleamed brightest in the centre, and each side
    In equal measure did the flame abate.

And at that centre, with their wings expanded,
    More than a thousand jubilant Angels saw I,
    Each differing in effulgence and in kind.

I saw there at their sports and at their songs
    A beauty smiling, which the gladness was
    Within the eyes of all the other saints;

And if I had in speaking as much wealth
    As in imagining, I should not dare
    To attempt the smallest part of its delight.

Bernard, as soon as he beheld mine eyes
    Fixed and intent upon its fervid fervour,
    His own with such affection turned to her

That it made mine more ardent to behold.






Absorbed in his delight, that contemplator
    Assumed the willing office of a teacher,
    And gave beginning to these holy words:

“The wound that Mary closed up and anointed,
    She at her feet who is so beautiful,
    She is the one who opened it and pierced it.

Within that order which the third seats make
    Is seated Rachel, lower than the other,
    With Beatrice, in manner as thou seest.

Sarah, Rebecca, Judith, and her who was
    Ancestress of the Singer, who for dole
    Of the misdeed said, ‘Miserere mei,’

Canst thou behold from seat to seat descending
    Down in gradation, as with each one’s name
    I through the Rose go down from leaf to leaf.

And downward from the seventh row, even as
    Above the same, succeed the Hebrew women,
    Dividing all the tresses of the flower;

Because, according to the view which Faith
    In Christ had taken, these are the partition
    By which the sacred stairways are divided.

Upon this side, where perfect is the flower
    With each one of its petals, seated are
    Those who believed in Christ who was to come.

Upon the other side, where intersected
    With vacant spaces are the semicircles,
    Are those who looked to Christ already come.

And as, upon this side, the glorious seat
    Of the Lady of Heaven, and the other seats
    Below it, such a great division make,

So opposite doth that of the great John,
    Who, ever holy, desert and martyrdom
    Endured, and afterwards two years in Hell.

And under him thus to divide were chosen
    Francis, and Benedict, and Augustine,
    And down to us the rest from round to round.

Behold now the high providence divine;
    For one and other aspect of the Faith
    In equal measure shall this garden fill.

And know that downward from that rank which cleaves
    Midway the sequence of the two divisions,
    Not by their proper merit are they seated;

But by another’s under fixed conditions;
    For these are spirits one and all assoiled
    Before they any true election had.

Well canst thou recognise it in their faces,
    And also in their voices puerile,
    If thou regard them well and hearken to them.

Now doubtest thou, and doubting thou art silent;
    But I will loosen for thee the strong bond
    In which thy subtile fancies hold thee fast.

Within the amplitude of this domain
    No casual point can possibly find place,
    No more than sadness can, or thirst, or hunger;

For by eternal law has been established
    Whatever thou beholdest, so that closely
    The ring is fitted to the finger here.

And therefore are these people, festinate
    Unto true life, not ‘sine causa’ here
    More and less excellent among themselves.

The King, by means of whom this realm reposes
    In so great love and in so great delight
    That no will ventureth to ask for more,

In his own joyous aspect every mind
    Creating, at his pleasure dowers with grace
    Diversely; and let here the effect suffice.

And this is clearly and expressly noted
    For you in Holy Scripture, in those twins
    Who in their mother had their anger roused.

According to the colour of the hair,
    Therefore, with such a grace the light supreme
    Consenteth that they worthily be crowned.

Without, then, any merit of their deeds,
    Stationed are they in different gradations,
    Differing only in their first acuteness.

’Tis true that in the early centuries,
    With innocence, to work out their salvation
    Sufficient was the faith of parents only.

After the earlier ages were completed,
    Behoved it that the males by circumcision
    Unto their innocent wings should virtue add;

But after that the time of grace had come
    Without the baptism absolute of Christ,
    Such innocence below there was retained.

Look now into the face that unto Christ
    Hath most resemblance; for its brightness only
    Is able to prepare thee to see Christ.”

On her did I behold so great a gladness
    Rain down, borne onward in the holy minds
    Created through that altitude to fly,

That whatsoever I had seen before
    Did not suspend me in such admiration,
    Nor show me such similitude of God.

And the same Love that first descended there,
    “Ave Maria, gratia plena,” singing,
    In front of her his wings expanded wide.

Unto the canticle divine responded
    From every part the court beatified,
    So that each sight became serener for it.

“O holy father, who for me endurest
    To be below here, leaving the sweet place
    In which thou sittest by eternal lot,

Who is the Angel that with so much joy
    Into the eyes is looking of our Queen,
    Enamoured so that he seems made of fire?”

Thus I again recourse had to the teaching
    Of that one who delighted him in Mary
    As doth the star of morning in the sun.

And he to me: “Such gallantry and grace
    As there can be in Angel and in soul,
    All is in him; and thus we fain would have it;

Because he is the one who bore the palm
    Down unto Mary, when the Son of God
    To take our burden on himself decreed.

But now come onward with thine eyes, as I
    Speaking shall go, and note the great patricians
    Of this most just and merciful of empires.

Those two that sit above there most enrapture
    As being very near unto Augusta,
    Are as it were the two roots of this Rose.

He who upon the left is near her placed
    The father is, by whose audacious taste
    The human species so much bitter tastes.

Upon the right thou seest that ancient father
    Of Holy Church, into whose keeping Christ
    The keys committed of this lovely flower.

And he who all the evil days beheld,
    Before his death, of her the beauteous bride
    Who with the spear and with the nails was won,

Beside him sits, and by the other rests
    That leader under whom on manna lived
    The people ingrate, fickle, and stiff-necked.

Opposite Peter seest thou Anna seated,
    So well content to look upon her daughter,
    Her eyes she moves not while she sings Hosanna.

And opposite the eldest household father
    Lucia sits, she who thy Lady moved
    When to rush downward thou didst bend thy brows.

But since the moments of thy vision fly,
    Here will we make full stop, as a good tailor
    Who makes the gown according to his cloth,

And unto the first Love will turn our eyes,
    That looking upon Him thou penetrate
    As far as possible through his effulgence.

Truly, lest peradventure thou recede,
    Moving thy wings believing to advance,
    By prayer behoves it that grace be obtained;

Grace from that one who has the power to aid thee;
    And thou shalt follow me with thy affection
    That from my words thy heart turn not aside.”

And he began this holy orison.







“Thou Virgin Mother, daughter of thy Son,
    Humble and high beyond all other creature,
    The limit fixed of the eternal counsel,

Thou art the one who such nobility
    To human nature gave, that its Creator
    Did not disdain to make himself its creature.

Within thy womb rekindled was the love,
    By heat of which in the eternal peace
    After such wise this flower has germinated.

Here unto us thou art a noonday torch
    Of charity, and below there among mortals
    Thou art the living fountain-head of hope.

Lady, thou art so great, and so prevailing,
    That he who wishes grace, nor runs to thee,
    His aspirations without wings would fly.

Not only thy benignity gives succour
    To him who asketh it, but oftentimes
    Forerunneth of its own accord the asking.

In thee compassion is, in thee is pity,
    In thee magnificence; in thee unites
    Whate’er of goodness is in any creature.

Now doth this man, who from the lowest depth
    Of the universe as far as here has seen
    One after one the spiritual lives,

Supplicate thee through grace for so much power
    That with his eyes he may uplift himself
    Higher towards the uttermost salvation.

And I, who never burned for my own seeing
    More than I do for his, all of my prayers
    Proffer to thee, and pray they come not short,

That thou wouldst scatter from him every cloud
    Of his mortality so with thy prayers,
    That the Chief Pleasure be to him displayed.

Still farther do I pray thee, Queen, who canst
    Whate’er thou wilt, that sound thou mayst preserve
    After so great a vision his affections.

Let thy protection conquer human movements;
    See Beatrice and all the blessed ones
    My prayers to second clasp their hands to thee!”

The eyes beloved and revered of God,
    Fastened upon the speaker, showed to us
    How grateful unto her are prayers devout;

Then unto the Eternal Light they turned,
    On which it is not credible could be
    By any creature bent an eye so clear.

And I, who to the end of all desires
    Was now approaching, even as I ought
    The ardour of desire within me ended.

Bernard was beckoning unto me, and smiling,
    That I should upward look; but I already
    Was of my own accord such as he wished;

Because my sight, becoming purified,
    Was entering more and more into the ray
    Of the High Light which of itself is true.

From that time forward what I saw was greater
    Than our discourse, that to such vision yields,
    And yields the memory unto such excess.

Even as he is who seeth in a dream,
    And after dreaming the imprinted passion
    Remains, and to his mind the rest returns not,

Even such am I, for almost utterly
    Ceases my vision, and distilleth yet
    Within my heart the sweetness born of it;

Even thus the snow is in the sun unsealed,
    Even thus upon the wind in the light leaves
    Were the soothsayings of the Sibyl lost.

O Light Supreme, that dost so far uplift thee
    From the conceits of mortals, to my mind
    Of what thou didst appear re-lend a little,

And make my tongue of so great puissance,
    That but a single sparkle of thy glory
    It may bequeath unto the future people;

For by returning to my memory somewhat,
    And by a little sounding in these verses,
    More of thy victory shall be conceived!

I think the keenness of the living ray
    Which I endured would have bewildered me,
    If but mine eyes had been averted from it;

And I remember that I was more bold
    On this account to bear, so that I joined
    My aspect with the Glory Infinite.

O grace abundant, by which I presumed
    To fix my sight upon the Light Eternal,
    So that the seeing I consumed therein!

I saw that in its depth far down is lying
    Bound up with love together in one volume,
    What through the universe in leaves is scattered;

Substance, and accident, and their operations,
    All interfused together in such wise
    That what I speak of is one simple light.

The universal fashion of this knot
    Methinks I saw, since more abundantly
    In saying this I feel that I rejoice.

One moment is more lethargy to me,
    Than five and twenty centuries to the emprise
    That startled Neptune with the shade of Argo!

My mind in this wise wholly in suspense,
    Steadfast, immovable, attentive gazed,
    And evermore with gazing grew enkindled.

In presence of that light one such becomes,
    That to withdraw therefrom for other prospect
    It is impossible he e’er consent;

Because the good, which object is of will,
    Is gathered all in this, and out of it
    That is defective which is perfect there.

Shorter henceforward will my language fall
    Of what I yet remember, than an infant’s
    Who still his tongue doth moisten at the breast.

Not because more than one unmingled semblance
    Was in the living light on which I looked,
    For it is always what it was before;

But through the sight, that fortified itself
    In me by looking, one appearance only
    To me was ever changing as I changed.

Within the deep and luminous subsistence
    Of the High Light appeared to me three circles,
    Of threefold colour and of one dimension,

And by the second seemed the first reflected
    As Iris is by Iris, and the third
    Seemed fire that equally from both is breathed.

O how all speech is feeble and falls short
    Of my conceit, and this to what I saw
    Is such, ’tis not enough to call it little!

O Light Eterne, sole in thyself that dwellest,
    Sole knowest thyself, and, known unto thyself
    And knowing, lovest and smilest on thyself!

That circulation, which being thus conceived
    Appeared in thee as a reflected light,
    When somewhat contemplated by mine eyes,

Within itself, of its own very colour
    Seemed to me painted with our effigy,
    Wherefore my sight was all absorbed therein.

As the geometrician, who endeavours
    To square the circle, and discovers not,
    By taking thought, the principle he wants,

Even such was I at that new apparition;
    I wished to see how the image to the circle
    Conformed itself, and how it there finds place;

But my own wings were not enough for this,
    Had it not been that then my mind there smote
    A flash of lightning, wherein came its wish.

Here vigour failed the lofty fantasy:
    But now was turning my desire and will,
    Even as a wheel that equally is moved,

The Love which moves the sun and the other stars.









Oft have I seen at some cathedral door
    A laborer, pausing in the dust and heat,
    Lay down his burden, and with reverent feet
    Enter, and cross himself, and on the floor
Kneel to repeat his paternoster o’er;
    Far off the noises of the world retreat;
    The loud vociferations of the street
    Become an undistinguishable roar.
So, as I enter here from day to day,
    And leave my burden at this minster gate,
    Kneeling in prayer, and not ashamed to pray,
The tumult of the time disconsolate
    To inarticulate murmurs dies away,
    While the eternal ages watch and wait.




How strange the sculptures that adorn these towers!
    This crowd of statues, in whose folded sleeves
    Birds build their nests; while canopied with leaves
    Parvis and portal bloom like trellised bowers,
And the vast minster seems a cross of flowers!
    But fiends and dragons on the gargoyled eaves
    Watch the dead Christ between the living thieves,
    And, underneath, the traitor Judas lowers!
Ah! from what agonies of heart and brain,
    What exultations trampling on despair,
    What tenderness, what tears, what hate of wrong,
What passionate outcry of a soul in pain,
    Uprose this poem of the earth and air,
    This mediaeval miracle of song!




I enter, and I see thee in the gloom
    Of the long aisles, O poet saturnine!
    And strive to make my steps keep pace with thine.
    The air is filled with some unknown perfume;
The congregation of the dead make room
    For thee to pass; the votive tapers shine;
    Like rooks that haunt Ravenna’s groves of pine,
    The hovering echoes fly from tomb to tomb.
From the confessionals I hear arise
    Rehearsals of forgotten tragedies,
    And lamentations from the crypts below
And then a voice celestial that begins
    With the pathetic words, “Although your sins
    As scarlet be,” and ends with “as the snow.”




With snow-white veil, and garments as of flame,
    She stands before thee, who so long ago
    Filled thy young heart with passion and the woe
    From which thy song in all its splendors came;
And while with stern rebuke she speaks thy name,
    The ice about thy heart melts as the snow
    On mountain heights, and in swift overflow
    Comes gushing from thy lips in sobs of shame.
Thou makest full confession; and a gleam
    As of the dawn on some dark forest cast,
    Seems on thy lifted forehead to increase;
Lethe and Eunoe—the remembered dream
    And the forgotten sorrow—bring at last
    That perfect pardon which is perfect peace.



I Lift mine eyes, and all the windows blaze
    With forms of saints and holy men who died,
    Here martyred and hereafter glorified;
    And the great Rose upon its leaves displays
Christ’s Triumph, and the angelic roundelays,
    With splendor upon splendor multiplied;
    And Beatrice again at Dante’s side
    No more rebukes, but smiles her words of praise.
And then the organ sounds, and unseen choirs
    Sing the old Latin hymns of peace and love
    And benedictions of the Holy Ghost;
And the melodious bells among the spires
    O’er all the house-tops and through heaven above
    Proclaim the elevation of the Host!




O star of morning and of liberty!
    O bringer of the light, whose splendor shines
    Above the darkness of the Apennines,
    Forerunner of the day that is to be!
The voices of the city and the sea,
    The voices of the mountains and the pines,
    Repeat thy song, till the familiar lines
    Are footpaths for the thought of Italy!
Thy fame is blown abroad from all the heights,
    Through all the nations; and a sound is heard,
    As of a mighty wind, and men devout,
Strangers of Rome, and the new proselytes,
    In their own language hear thy wondrous word,
    And many are amazed and many doubt.



Of Peleus’ son, Achilles, sing, O Muse,
The vengeance, deep and deadly; whence to Greece
Unnumbered ills arose; which many a soul
Of mighty warriors to the viewless shades
Untimely sent; they on the battle plain
Unburied lay, a prey to rav’ning dogs,
And carrion birds; but so had Jove decreed,
From that sad day when first in wordy war,
The mighty Agamemnon, King of men,
Confronted stood by Peleus’ godlike son.

Say then, what God the fatal strife provok’d?
Jove’s and Latona’s son; he, filled with wrath
Against the King, with deadly pestilence
The camp afflicted,—and the people died,—
For Chryses’ sake, his priest, whom Atreus’ son
With scorn dismiss’d, when to the Grecian ships
He came, his captive daughter to redeem,
With costly ransom charg’d; and in his hand
The sacred fillet of his God he bore,
And golden staff; to all he sued, but chief
To Atreus’ sons, twin captains of the host:
“Ye sons of Atreus, and ye well-greav’d Greeks,
May the great Gods, who on Olympus dwell,
Grant you yon hostile city to destroy,
And home return in safety; but my child
Restore, I pray; her proffer’d ransom take,
And in his priest, the Lord of Light revere.”

Then through the ranks assenting murmurs ran,
The priest to rev’rence, and the ransom take:
Not so Atrides; he, with haughty mien,
And bitter speech, the trembling sire address’d:
“Old man, I warn thee, that beside our ships
I find thee not, or ling’ring now, or back
Returning; lest thou prove of small avail
Thy golden staff, and fillet of thy God.
Her I release not, till her youth be fled;
Within my walls, in Argos, far from home,
Her lot is cast, domestic cares to ply,
And share a master’s bed. For thee, begone!
Incense me not, lest ill betide thee now.”

He said: the old man trembled, and obeyed;
Beside the many-dashing Ocean’s shore
Silent he pass’d; and all apart, he pray’d
To great Apollo, fair Latona’s son:

“Hear me, God of the silver bow! whose care
Chrysa surrounds, and Cilia’s lovely vale;
Whose sov’reign sway o’er Tenedos extends;
O Smintheus, hear! if e’er my offered gifts
Found favour in thy sight; if e’er to thee
I burn’d the fat of bulls and choicest goats,
Grant me this boon—upon the Grecian host
Let thine unerring darts avenge my tears.”

Thus as he pray’d, his pray’r Apollo heard:
Along Olympus’ heights he pass’d, his heart
Burning with wrath; behind his shoulders hung
His bow, and ample quiver; at his back
Rattled the fateful arrows as he mov’d;
Like the night-cloud he pass’d, and from afar
He bent against the ships, and sped the bolt;
And fierce and deadly twang’d the silver bow.
First on the mules and dogs, on man the last,
Was pour’d the arrowy storm; and through the camp,
Constant and num’rous, blaz’d the fun’ral fires.

Nine days the heav’nly Archer on the troops
Hurl’d his dread shafts; the tenth, th’ assembled Greeks
Achilles call’d to council; so inspir’d
By Juno, white-arm’d Goddess, who beheld
With pitying eyes the wasting hosts of Greece.
When all were met, and closely throng’d around,
Rose the swift-footed chief, and thus began:

“Great son of Atreus, to my mind there seems,
If we would ’scape from death, one only course,
Home to retrace our steps: since here at once
By war and pestilence our forces waste.
But seek we first some prophet, or some priest,
Or some wise vision-seer (since visions too
From Jove proceed), who may the cause explain,
Which with such deadly wrath Apollo fires:
If for neglected hecatombs or pray’rs
He blame us; or if fat of lambs and goats
May soothe his anger and the plague assuage.”

This said, he sat; and Thestor’s son arose,
Calchas, the chief of seers, to whom were known
The present, and the future, and the past;
Who, by his mystic art, Apollo’s gift,
Guided to Ilium’s shore the Grecian fleet.
Who thus with cautious speech replied, and said;
“Achilles, lov’d of Heav’n, thou bidd’st me say
Why thus incens’d the far-destroying King;
Therefore I speak; but promise thou, and swear,
By word and hand, to bear me harmless through.
For well I know my speech must one offend,
The Argive chief, o’er all the Greeks supreme;
And terrible to men of low estate
The anger of a King; for though awhile
He veil his wrath, yet in his bosom pent
It still is nurs’d, until the time arrive;
Say, then, wilt thou protect me, if I speak?”

Him answer’d thus Achilles, swift of foot:
“Speak boldly out whate’er thine art can tell;
For by Apollo’s self I swear, whom thou,
O Calchas, serv’st, and who thy words inspires,
That, while I live, and see the light of Heav’n,
Not one of all the Greeks shall dare on thee,
Beside our ships, injurious hands to lay:
No, not if Agamemnon’s self were he,
Who ’mid our warriors boasts the foremost place.”

Embolden’d thus, th’ unerring prophet spoke:
“Not for neglected hecatombs or pray’rs,
But for his priest, whom Agamemnon scorn’d,
Nor took his ransom, nor his child restor’d;
On his account the Far-destroyer sends
This scourge of pestilence, and yet will send;
Nor shall we cease his heavy hand to feel,
Till to her sire we give the bright-ey’d girl,
Unbought, unransom’d, and to Chrysa’s shore
A solemn hecatomb despatch; this done,
The God, appeas’d, his anger may remit.”

This said, he sat; and Atreus’ godlike son,
The mighty monarch, Agamemnon, rose,
His dark soul fill’d with fury, and his eyes
Flashing like flames of fire; on Calchas first
A with’ring glance he cast, and thus he spoke;

“Prophet of ill! thou never speak’st to me
But words of evil omen; for thy soul
Delights to augur ill, but aught of good
Thou never yet hast promis’d, nor perform’d.
And now among the Greeks thou spread’st abroad
Thy lying prophecies, that all these ills
Come from the Far-destroyer, for that I
Refus’d the ransom of my lovely prize,
And that I rather chose herself to keep,
To me not less than Clytemnestra dear,
My virgin-wedded wife; nor less adorn’d
In gifts of form, of feature, or of mind.
Yet, if it must he so, I give her back;
I wish my people’s safety, not their death.
But seek me out forthwith some other spoil,
Lest empty-handed I alone appear
Of all the Greeks; for this would ill beseem;
And how I lose my present share, ye see.”

To whom Achilles, swift of foot, replied:
“Haughtiest of men, and greediest of the prey!
How shall our valiant Greeks for thee seek out
Some other spoil? no common fund have we
Of hoarded treasures; what our arms have won
From captur’d towns, has been already shar’d,
Nor can we now resume th’ apportion’d spoil.
Restore the maid, obedient to the God!
And if Heav’n will that we the strong-built walls
Of Troy should raze, our warriors will to thee
A threefold, fourfold recompense assign.”

To whom the monarch Agamemnon thus:
“Think not, Achilles, valiant though thou art
In fight, and godlike, to defraud me thus;
Thou shalt not so persuade me, nor o’erreach.
Think’st thou to keep thy portion of the spoil,
While I with empty hands sit humbly down?
The bright-ey’d girl thou bidd’st me to restore;
If then the valiant Greeks for me seek out
Some other spoil, some compensation just,
’Tis well: if not, I with my own right hand
Will from some other chief, from thee perchance,
Or Ajax, or Ulysses, wrest his prey;
And woe to him, on whomsoe’er I call!
But this for future counsel we remit:
Haste we then now our dark-ribb’d bark to launch,
Muster a fitting crew, and place on board
The sacred hecatomb; then last embark
The fair Chryseis; and in chief command
Let some one of our councillors be plac’d,
Ajax, Ulysses, or Idomeneus,
Or thou, the most ambitious of them all,
That so our rites may soothe the angry God.”

To whom Achilles thus with scornful glance;
“Oh, cloth’d in shamelessness! oh, sordid soul!
How canst thou hope that any Greek for thee
Will brave the toils of travel or of war?
Well dost thou know that ’t was no feud of mine
With Troy’s brave sons that brought me here in arms;
They never did me wrong; they never drove
My cattle, or my horses; never sought
In Phthia’s fertile, life-sustaining fields
To waste the crops; for wide between us lay
The shadowy mountains and the roaring sea.
With thee, O void of shame! with thee we sail’d,
For Menelaus and for thee, ingrate,
Glory and fame on Trojan crests to win.
All this hast thou forgotten, or despis’d;
And threat’nest now to wrest from me the prize
I labour’d hard to win, and Greeks bestow’d.
Nor does my portion ever equal thine,
When on some populous town our troops have made
Successful war; in the contentious fight
The larger portion of the toil is mine;
But when the day of distribution comes,
Thine is the richest spoil; while I, forsooth,
Must be too well content to bear on board
Some paltry prize for all my warlike toil.
To Phthia now I go; so better far,
To steer my homeward course, and leave thee here
But little like, I deem, dishonouring me,
To fill thy coffers with the spoils of war.”

Whom answer’d Agamemnon, King of men:
“Fly then, if such thy mind! I ask thee not
On mine account to stay; others there are
Will guard my honour and avenge my cause:
And chief of all, the Lord of counsel, Jove!
Of all the Heav’n-born Kings, thou art the man
I hate the most; for thou delight’st in nought
But war and strife: thy prowess I allow;
Yet this, remember, is the gift of Heav’n.
Return then, with thy vessels, if thou wilt,
And with thy followers, home; and lord it there
Over thy Myrmidons! I heed thee not!
I care not for thy fury! Hear my threat:
Since Phoebus wrests Chryseis from my arms,
In mine own ship, and with mine own good crew,
Her I send forth; and, in her stead, I mean,
Ev’n from thy tent, myself, to bear thy prize,
The fair Briseis; that henceforth thou know
How far I am thy master; and that, taught
By thine example, others too may fear
To rival me, and brave me to my face.”

Thus while he spake, Achilles chaf’d with rage;
And in his manly breast his heart was torn
With thoughts conflicting—whether from his side
To draw his mighty sword, and thrusting by
Th’ assembled throng, to kill th’ insulting King;
Or school his soul, and keep his anger down.
But while in mind and spirit thus he mus’d,
And half unsheath’d his sword, from Heav’n came down
Minerva, sent by Juno, white-arm’d Queen,
Whose love and care both chiefs alike enjoy’d.
She stood behind, and by the yellow hair
She held the son of Peleus, visible
To him alone, by all the rest unseen.
Achilles, wond’ring, turn’d, and straight he knew
The blue-eyed Pallas; awful was her glance;
Whom thus the chief with winged words address’d:

“Why com’st thou, child of aegis-bearing Jove?
To see the arrogance of Atreus’ son?
But this I say, and will make good my words,
This insolence may cost him soon his life.”

To whom the blue-ey’d Goddess thus replied:
“From Heav’n I came, to curb, if thou wilt hear,
Thy fury; sent by Juno, white-arm’d Queen,
Whose love and care ye both alike enjoy.
Cease, then, these broils, and draw not thus thy sword;
In words, indeed, assail him as thou wilt.
But this I promise, and will make it good,
The time shall come, when for this insolence
A threefold compensation shall be thine;
Only be sway’d by me, and curb thy wrath.”

Whom answer’d thus Achilles, swift of foot:
“Goddess, I needs must yield to your commands,
Indignant though I be—for so ’tis best;
Who hears the Gods, of them his pray’rs are heard.”

He said: and on the silver hilt he stay’d
His pow’rful hand, and flung his mighty sword
Back to its scabbard, to Minerva’s word
Obedient: she her heav’nward course pursued
To join th’ Immortals in th’ abode of Jove.
But Peleus’ son, with undiminish’d wrath,
Atrides thus with bitter words address’d:

“Thou sot, with eye of dog, and heart of deer!
Who never dar’st to lead in armed fight
Th’ assembled host, nor with a chosen few
To man the secret ambush—for thou fear’st
To look on death—no doubt ’tis easier far,
Girt with thy troops, to plunder of his right
Whoe’er may venture to oppose thy will!
A tyrant King, because thou rul’st o’er slaves!
Were it not so, this insult were thy last.
But this I say, and with an oath confirm,
By this my royal staff, which never more
Shall put forth leaf nor spray, since first it left
Upon the mountain-side its parent stem,
Nor blossom more; since all around the axe
Hath lopp’d both leaf and bark, and now ’tis borne
Emblem of justice, by the sons of Greece,
Who guard the sacred ministry of law
Before the face of Jove! a mighty oath!
The time shall come, when all the sons of Greece
Shall mourn Achilles’ loss; and thou the while,
Heart-rent, shalt be all-impotent to aid,
When by the warrior-slayer Hector’s hand
Many shall fall; and then thy soul shall mourn
The slight on Grecia’s bravest warrior cast.”

Thus spoke Pelides; and upon the ground
He cast his staff, with golden studs emboss’d,
And took his seat; on th’ other side, in wrath,
Atrides burn’d; but Nestor interpos’d;
Nestor, the leader of the Pylian host,
The smooth-tongued chief, from whose persuasive lips
Sweeter than honey flowed the stream of speech.
Two generations of the sons of men
For him were past and gone, who with himself
Were born and bred on Pylos’ lovely shore,
And o’er the third he now held royal sway.
He thus with prudent words the chiefs address’d:

“Alas, alas! what grief is this for Greece!
What joy for Priam, and for Priam’s sons!
What exultation for the men of Troy,
To hear of feuds ’tween you, of all the Greeks
The first in council, and the first in fight!
Yet, hear my words, I pray; in years, at least,
Ye both must yield to me; and in times past
I liv’d with men, and they despis’d me not,
Abler in counsel, greater than yourselves.
Such men I never saw, and ne’er shall see,
As Pirithous and Dryas, wise and brave,
Coeneus, Exadius, godlike Polypheme,
And Theseus, Ægeus’ more than mortal son.
The mightiest they among the sons of men;
The mightiest they, and of the forest beasts
Strove with the mightiest, and their rage subdued.
With them from distant lands, from Pylos’ shore
I join’d my forces, and their call obey’d;
With them I play’d my part; with them, not one
Would dare to fight of mortals now on earth.
Yet they my counsels heard, my voice obey’d;
And hear ye also, for my words are wise.
Nor thou, though great thou be, attempt to rob
Achilles of his prize, but let him keep
The spoil assign’d him by the sons of Greece;
Nor thou, Pelides, with the monarch strive
In rivalry; for ne’er to sceptred King
Hath Jove such pow’rs, as to Atrides, giv’n;
And valiant though thou art, and Goddess-born,
Yet mightier he, for wider is his sway.
Atrides, curb thy wrath! while I beseech
Achilles to forbear; in whom the Greeks
From adverse war their great defender see.”

To whom the monarch, Agamemnon, thus:
“O father, full of wisdom are thy words;
But this proud chief o’er all would domineer;
O’er all he seeks to rule, o’er all to reign,
To all to dictate; which I will not bear.
Grant that the Gods have giv’n him warlike might,
Gave they unbridled license to his tongue?”

To whom Achilles, interrupting, thus:
“Coward and slave indeed I might be deem’d.
Could I submit to make thy word my law;
To others thy commands; seek not to me
To dictate, for I follow thee no more.
But hear me speak, and ponder what I say:
For the fair girl I fight not (since you choose
To take away the prize yourselves bestow’d)
With thee or any one; but of the rest
My dark swift ship contains, against my will
On nought shalt thou, unpunish’d, lay thy hand.
Make trial if thou wilt, that these may know;
Thy life-blood soon should reek upon my spear.”

After this conflict keen of angry speech,
The chiefs arose, the assembly was dispers’d.

With his own followers, and Menoetius’ son,
Achilles to his tents and ships withdrew.
But Atreus’ son launch’d a swift-sailing bark,
With twenty rowers mann’d, and plac’d on board
The sacred hecatomb; then last embark’d
The fair Chryseis, and in chief command
Laertes’ son, the sage Ulysses, plac’d.
They swiftly sped along the wat’ry way.

Next, proclamation through the camp was made
To purify the host; and in the sea,
Obedient to the word, they purified;
Then to Apollo solemn rites perform’d
With faultless hecatombs of bulls and goats,
Upon the margin of the wat’ry waste;
And, wreath’d in smoke, the savour rose to Heav’n.

The camp thus occupied, the King pursued
His threaten’d plan of vengeance; to his side
Calling Talthybius and Eurybates,
Heralds, and faithful followers, thus he spoke:

“Haste to Achilles’ tent, and in your hand
Back with you thence the fair Briseis bring:
If he refuse to send her, I myself
With a sufficient force will bear her thence,
Which he may find, perchance, the worse for him.”

So spake the monarch, and with stern command
Dismiss’d them; with reluctant steps they pass’d
Along the margin of the wat’ry waste,
Till to the tents and ships they came, where lay
The warlike Myrmidons. Their chief they found
Sitting beside his tent and dark-ribb’d ship.
Achilles mark’d their coming, not well pleas’d:
With troubled mien, and awe-struck by the King,
They stood, nor dar’d accost him; but himself
Divin’d their errand, and address’d them thus:

“Welcome, ye messengers of Gods and men,
Heralds! approach in safety; not with you,
But with Atrides, is my just offence,
Who for the fair Briseis sends you here.
Go, then, Patroclus, bring the maiden forth,
And give her to their hands; but witness ye,
Before the blessed Gods and mortal men,
And to the face of that injurious King,
When he shall need my arm, from shameful rout
To save his followers; blinded by his rage,
He neither heeds experience of the past
Nor scans the future, provident how best
To guard his fleet and army from the foe.”

He spoke: obedient to his friend and chief,
Patroclus led the fair Briseis forth,
And gave her to their hands; they to the ships
Retrac’d their steps, and with them the fair girl
Reluctant went: meanwhile Achilles, plung’d
In bitter grief, from all the band apart,
Upon the margin of the hoary sea
Sat idly gazing on the dark-blue waves;
And to his Goddess-mother long he pray’d,
With outstretch’d hands, “Oh, mother! since thy son
To early death by destiny is doom’d,
I might have hop’d the Thunderer on high,
Olympian Jove, with honour would have crown’d
My little space; but now disgrace is mine;
Since Agamemnon, the wide-ruling King,
Hath wrested from me, and still holds, my prize.”

Weeping, he spoke; his Goddess-mother heard,
Beside her aged father where she sat
In the deep ocean-caves: ascending quick
Through the dark waves, like to a misty cloud,
Beside her son she stood; and as he wept,
She gently touch’d him with her hand, and said,
“Why weeps my son? and whence his cause of grief?
Speak out, that I may hear, and share thy pain.”

To whom Achilles, swift of foot, replied,
Groaning, “Thou know’st; what boots to tell thee all?
On Thebes we march’d, Eetion’s sacred town,
And storm’d the walls, and hither bore the spoil.
The spoils were fairly by the sons of Greece
Apportion’d out; and to Atrides’ share
The beauteous daughter of old Chryses fell.
Chryses, Apollo’s priest, to free his child,
Came to th’ encampment of the brass-clad Greeks,
With costly ransom charg’d; and in his hand
The sacred fillet of his God he bore,
And golden staff; to all he sued, but chief
To Atreus’ sons, twin captains of the host.
Then through the ranks assenting murmurs ran,
The priest to rev’rence, and the ransom take:
Not so Atrides; he, with haughty mien
And bitter words, the trembling sire dismiss’d.
The old man turn’d in sorrow; but his pray’r
Phoebus Apollo heard, who lov’d him well.
Against the Greeks he bent his fatal bow,
And fast the people fell; on ev’ry side
Throughout the camp the heav’nly arrows flew;
A skilful seer at length the cause reveal’d
Why thus incens’d the Archer-God; I then,
The first, gave counsel to appease his wrath.
Whereat Atrides, full of fury, rose,
And utter’d threats, which he hath now fulfill’d.
For Chryses’ daughter to her native land
In a swift-sailing ship the keen-ey’d Greeks
Have sent, with costly off’rings to the God:
But her, assign’d me by the sons of Greece,
Brises’ fair daughter, from my tent e’en now
The heralds bear away. Then, Goddess, thou,
If thou hast pow’r, protect thine injur’d son.
Fly to Olympus, to the feet of Jove,
And make thy pray’r to him, if on his heart
Thou hast in truth, by word or deed, a claim.
For I remember, in my father’s house,
I oft have heard thee boast, how thou, alone
Of all th’ Immortals, Saturn’s cloud-girt son
Didst shield from foul disgrace, when all the rest,
Juno, and Neptune, and Minerva join’d,
With chains to bind him; then, O Goddess, thou
Didst set him free, invoking to his aid
Him of the hundred arms, whom Briareus
Th’ immortal Gods, and men Ægeon call.
He, mightier than his father, took his seat
By Saturn’s side, in pride of conscious strength:
Fear seiz’d on all the Gods, nor did they dare
To bind their King: of this remind him now,
And clasp his knees, and supplicate his aid
For Troy’s brave warriors, that the routed Greeks
Back to their ships with slaughter may be driv’n;
That all may taste the folly of their King,
And Agamemnon’s haughty self may mourn
The slight on Grecia’s bravest warrior cast.”

Thus he; and Thetis, weeping, thus replied:
“Alas, my child, that e’er I gave thee birth!
Would that beside thy ships thou could’st remain
From grief exempt, and insult! since by fate
Few years are thine, and not a lengthened term;
At once to early death and sorrows doom’d
Beyond the lot of man! in evil hour
I gave thee birth! But to the snow-clad heights
Of great Olympus, to the throne of Jove,
Who wields the thunder, thy complaints I bear.
Thou by thy ships, meanwhile, against the Greeks
Thine anger nurse, and from the fight abstain.
For Jove is to a solemn banquet gone
Beyond the sea, on Æthiopia’s shore,
Since yesternight; and with him all the Gods.
On the twelfth day he purpos’d to return
To high Olympus; thither then will I,
And to his feet my supplication make;
And he, I think, will not deny my suit.”

This said, she disappear’d; and left him there
Musing in anger on the lovely form
Tom from his arms by violence away.

Meantime, Ulysses, with his sacred freight,
Arriv’d at Chrysa’s strand; and when his bark
Had reach’d the shelter of the deep sea bay,
Their sails they furl’d, and lower’d to the hold;
Slack’d the retaining shrouds, and quickly struck
And stow’d away the mast; then with their sweeps
Pull’d for the beach, and cast their anchors out,
And made her fast with cables to the shore.
Then on the shingly breakwater themselves
They landed, and the sacred hecatomb
To great Apollo; and Chryseis last.
Her to the altar straight Ulysses led,
The wise in counsel; in her father’s hand
He plac’d the maiden, and address’d him thus:
“Chryses, from Agamemnon, King of men,
To thee I come, thy daughter to restore;
And to thy God, upon the Greeks’ behalf,
To offer sacrifice, if haply so
We may appease his wrath, who now incens’d
With grievous suff’ring visits all our host.”
Then to her sire he gave her; he with joy
Receiv’d his child; the sacred hecatomb
Around the well-built altar for the God
In order due they plac’d; their hands then washed,
And the salt cake prepar’d, before them all
With hands uplifted Chryses pray’d aloud:

“Hear me, God of the silver bow! whose care
Chrysa surrounds, and Cilla’s lovely vale,
Whose sov’reign sway o’er Tenedos extends!
Once hast thou heard my pray’r, aveng’d my cause,
And pour’d thy fury on the Grecian host.
Hear yet again, and grant what now I ask;
Withdraw thy chast’ning hand, and stay the plague.”

Thus, as he pray’d, his pray’r Apollo heard.
Their pray’rs concluded, and the salt cake strew’d
Upon the victims’ heads, they drew them back,
And slew, and flay’d; then cutting from the thighs
The choicest pieces, and in double layers
O’erspreading them with fat, above them plac’d
The due meat-off’rings; then the aged priest
The cleft wood kindled, and libations pour’d
Of ruddy wine; arm’d with the five-fork’d prongs
Th’ attendant ministers beside him stood.
The thighs consum’d with fire, the inward parts
They tasted first; the rest upon the spits
Roasted with care, and from the fire withdrew.
Their labours ended, and the feast prepar’d,
They shared the social meal, nor lacked there aught.
The rage of thirst and hunger satisfied,
Th’ attendant youths the flowing goblets crown’d,
And in fit order serv’d the cups to all.
All day they sought the favour of the God,
The glorious paeans chanting, and the praise
Of Phoebus: he, well pleas’d, the strain receiv’d
But when the sun was set, and shades of night
O’erspread the sky, upon the sandy beach
Close to their ship they laid them down to rest.
And when the rosy-finger’d morn appear’d,
Back to the camp they took their homeward way
A fav’ring breeze the Far-destroyer sent:
They stepp’d the mast, and spread the snowy sail:
Full in the midst the bellying sail receiv’d
The gallant breeze; and round the vessel’s prow
The dark waves loudly roar’d, as on she rush’d
Skimming the seas, and cut her wat’ry way.
Arriv’d where lay the wide-spread host of Greece,
Their dark-ribb’d vessel on the beach they drew
High on the sand, and strongly shor’d her up;
Then through the camp they took their sev’ral ways.

Meantime, beside the ships Achilles sat,
The Heav’n-born son of Peleus, swift of foot,
Chafing with rage repress’d; no more he sought
The honour’d council, nor the battle-field;
But wore his soul away, and inly pin’d
For the fierce joy and tumult of the fight.
But when the twelfth revolving day was come,
Back to Olympus’ heights th’ immortal Gods,
Jove at their head, together all return’d.
Then Thetis, mindful of her son’s request,
Rose from the ocean wave, and sped in haste
To high Olympus, and the courts of Heav’n.
Th’ all-seeing son of Saturn there she found
Sitting apart upon the topmost crest
Of many-ridg’d Olympus; at his feet
She sat, and while her left hand clasp’d his knees,
Her right approached his beard, and suppliant thus
She made her pray’r to Saturn’s royal son:

“Father, if e’er amid th’ immortal Gods
By word or deed I did thee service true,
Hear now my pray’r! Avenge my hapless son,
Of mortals shortest-liv’d, insulted now
By mighty Agamemnon, King of men,
And plunder’d of his lawful spoils of war.
But Jove, Olympian, Lord of counsel, Thou
Avenge his cause; and give to Trojan arms
Such strength and pow’r, that Greeks may learn how much
They need my son, and give him honour due.”

She said: the Cloud-compeller answer’d not,
But silent sat; then Thetis clasp’d his knees,
And hung about him, and her suit renew’d:

“Give me thy promise sure, thy gracious nod,
Or else refuse (for thou hast none to fear),
That I may learn, of all th’ immortal Gods,
How far I stand the lowest in thine eyes.”

Then, much disturb’d, the Cloud-compeller spoke:
“Sad work thou mak’st, in bidding me oppose
My will to Juno’s, when her bitter words
Assail me; for full oft amid the Gods
She taunts me, that I aid the Trojan cause.
But thou return, that Juno see thee not,
And leave to me the furth’rance of thy suit.
Lo, to confirm thy faith, I nod my head;
And well among th’ immortal Gods is known
The solemn import of that pledge from me:
For ne’er my promise shall deceive, or fail,
Or be recall’d, if with a nod confirm’d.”

He said, and nodded with his shadowy brows;
Wav’d on th’ immortal head th’ ambrosial locks,
And all Olympus trembled at his nod.
They parted thus: from bright Olympus’ heights
The Goddess hasted to her ocean-caves,
Jove to his palace; at his entrance all
Rose from their seats at once; not one presum’d
To wait his coming, but advanc’d to meet.
Then on his throne he sat; but not unmark’d
Of Juno’s eye had been the council held
In secret with the silver-footed Queen,
The daughter of the aged Ocean-God;
And with sharp words she thus addressed her Lord:

“Tell me, deceiver, who was she with whom
Thou late held’st council? ever ’tis thy way
Apart from me to weave thy secret schemes,
Nor dost thou freely share with me thy mind.”

To whom the Sire of Gods and men replied:
“Expect not, Juno, all my mind to know;
My wife thou art, yet would such knowledge be
Too much for thee; whate’er I deem it fit
That thou shouldst know, nor God nor man shall hear
Before thee; but what I in secret plan,
Seek not to know, nor curiously inquire.”

Whom answer’d thus the stag-ey’d Queen of Heav’n:
“What words, dread son of Saturn, dost thou speak?
Ne’er have I sought, or now, or heretofore,
Thy secret thoughts to know; what thou think’st fit
To tell, I wait thy gracious will to hear.
Yet fear I in my soul thou art beguil’d
By wiles of Thetis, silver-footed Queen,
The daughter of the aged Ocean-God;
For she was with thee early, and embrac’d
Thy knees, and has, I think, thy promise sure,
Thou wilt avenge Achilles’ cause, and bring
Destructive slaughter on the Grecian host.”

To whom the Cloud-compeller thus replied:
“Presumptuous, to thy busy thoughts thou giv’st
Too free a range, and watchest all I do;
Yet shalt thou not prevail, but rather thus
Be alien’d from my heart—the worse for thee!
If this be so, it is my sov’reign will.
But now, keep silence, and my words obey,
Lest all th’ Immortals fail, if I be wroth,
To rescue thee from my resistless hand.”

He said, and terror seiz’d the stag-ey’d Queen:
Silent she sat, curbing her spirit down,
And all the Gods in pitying sorrow mourn’d.
Vulcan, the skill’d artificer, then first
Broke silence, and with soothing words address’d
His mother, Juno, white-arm’d Queen of Heav’n:
“Sad were’t, indeed, and grievous to be borne,
If for the sake of mortal men you two
Should suffer angry passions to arise,
And kindle broils in Heav’n; so should our feast
By evil influence all its sweetness lack.
Let me advise my mother (and I know
That her own reason will my words approve)
To speak my father fair; lest he again
Reply in anger, and our banquet mar.
For Jove, the lightning’s Lord, if such his will,
Might hurl us from our seats (so great his pow’r),
But thou address him still with gentle words;
So shall his favour soon again be ours.”

This said, he rose, and in his mother’s hand
A double goblet plac’d, as thus he spoke:
“Have patience, mother mine! though much enforc’d,
Restrain thy spirit, lest perchance these eyes,
Dear as thou art, behold thee brought to shame;
And I, though griev’d in heart, be impotent
To save thee; for ’tis hard to strive with Jove.
When to thy succour once before I came,
He seiz’d me by the foot, and hurl’d me down
From Heav’n’s high threshold; all the day I fell,
And with the setting sun, on Lemnos’ isle
Lighted, scarce half alive; there was I found,
And by the Sintian people kindly nurs’d.”

Thus as he spoke, the white-armed Goddess smil’d,
And, smiling, from, his hand receiv’d the cup,
Then to th’ Immortals all, in order due,
He minister’d, and from the flagon pour’d
The luscious nectar; while among the Gods
Rose laughter irrepressible, at sight
Of Vulcan hobbling round the spacious hall.

Thus they till sunset pass’d the festive hours;
Nor lack’d the banquet aught to please the sense,
Nor sound of tuneful lyre, by Phoebus touch’d,
Nor Muses’ voice, who in alternate strains
Responsive sang: but when the sun had set,
Each to his home departed, where for each
The crippled Vulcan, matchless architect,
With wondrous skill a noble house had rear’d.

To his own couch, where he was wont of old,
When overcome by gentle sleep, to rest,
Olympian Jove ascended; there he slept,
And, by his side, the golden-throned Queen.





All night in sleep repos’d the other Gods,
And helmed warriors; but the eyes of Jove
Sweet slumber held not, pondering in his mind
How to avenge Achilles’ cause, and pour
Destructive slaughter on the Grecian host.
Thus as he mus’d, the wisest course appear’d
By a deluding vision to mislead
The son of Atreus; and with winged words
Thus to a phantom form he gave command:
“Hie thee, deluding Vision, to the camp
And ships of Greece, to Agamemnon’s tent;
There, changing nought, as I command thee, speak.
Bid that he arm in haste the long-hair’d Greeks
To combat; for the wide-built streets of Troy
He now may capture; since th’ immortal Gods
Watch over her no longer; all are gain’d
By Juno’s pray’rs; and woes impend o’er Troy.”

He said: the Vision heard, and straight obey’d:
Swiftly he sped, and reached the Grecian ships,
And sought the son of Atreus; him he found
Within his tent, wrapped in ambrosial sleep;
Above his head he stood, like Neleus’ son,
Nestor, whom Agamemnon rev’renc’d most
Of all the Elders; in his likeness cloth’d
Thus spoke the heav’nly Vision; “Sleep’st thou, son
Of Atreus, valiant warrior, horseman bold?
To sleep all night but ill becomes a chief,
Charg’d with the public weal, and cares of state.
Hear now the words I bear; to thee I come
A messenger from Jove, who from on high
Looks down on thee with eyes of pitying love.
He bids thee arm in haste the long-hair’d Greeks
To combat; since the wide-built streets of Troy
Thou now mayst capture; for th’ immortal Gods
Watch over her no longer; all are gain’d
By Juno’s pray’rs; and woes impend o’er Troy.
Bear this in mind; and when from sleep arous’d
Let not my words from thy remembrance fade.”
This said, he vanish’d; and the monarch left,
Inspir’d with thoughts which ne’er should come to pass.
For in that day he vainly hop’d to take
The town of Priam; ignorant what Jove
Design’d in secret, or what woes, what groans,
What lengthen’d labours in the stubborn fight,
Were yet for Trojans and for Greeks in store.
He woke from sleep; but o’er his senses spread
Dwelt still the heavenly voice; he sat upright;
He donn’d his vest of texture fine, new-wrought,
Then o’er it threw his ample robe, and bound
His sandals fair around his well-turn’d feet;
And o’er his shoulders flung his sword, adorn’d
With silver studs; and bearing in his hand
His royal staff, ancestral, to the ships
Where lay the brass-clad warriors, bent his way.

Aurora now was rising up the steep
Of great Olympus, to th’ immortal Gods
Pure light diffusing; when Atrides bade
The clear-voic’d heralds to th’ Assembly call
The gen’ral host; they gave the word, and straight
From ev’ry quarter throng’d the eager crowd.
But first, of all the Elders, by the side
Of Nestor’s ship, the aged Pylian chief,
A secret conclave Agamemnon call’d;
And, prudent, thus the chosen few address’d:
“Hear me, my friends! In the still hours of night
I saw a heav’nly Vision in my sleep:
Most like it seemed in stature, form, and face
To rev’rend Nestor; at my head it stood,
And with these words address’d me—‘Sleep’st thou, son
Of Atreus, valiant warrior, horseman bold?
To sleep all night but ill becomes a chief,
Charg’d with the public weal, and cares of state.
Hear now the words I bear: to thee I come
A messenger from Jove, who from on high
Looks down on thee with eyes of pitying love.
He bids thee arm in haste the long-hair’d Greeks
To combat: since the wide-built streets of Troy
Thou now may’st capture; for th’ immortal Gods
Watch over her no longer: all are gain’d
By Juno’s pray’rs, and woes impend o’er Troy.
Bear thou my words in mind.’ Thus as he spoke
He vanish’d; and sweet sleep forsook mine eyes.
Seek we then straight to arm the sons of Greece:
But first, as is our wont, myself will prove
The spirit of the army; and suggest
Their homeward voyage; ye, throughout the camp
Restore their courage, and restrain from flight.”

Thus having said, he sat; and next arose
Nestor, the chief of Pylos’ sandy shore.
Who thus with prudent speech replied, and said:
“O friends, the chiefs and councillors of Greece,
If any other had this Vision seen,
We should have deem’d it false, and laugh’d to scorn
The idle tale; but now it hath appear’d,
Of all our army, to the foremost man:
Seek we then straight to arm the sons of Greece.”

He said, and from the council led the way.
Uprose the sceptred monarchs, and obey’d
Their leader’s call, and round them throng’d the crowd.
As swarms of bees, that pour in ceaseless stream
From out the crevice of some hollow rock,
Now clust’ring, and anon ’mid vernal flow’rs,
Some here, some there, in busy numbers fly;
So to th’ Assembly from their tents and ships
The countless tribes came thronging; in their midst,
By Jove enkindled, Rumour urged them on.
Great was the din; and as the mighty mass
Sat down, the solid earth beneath them groan’d;
Nine heralds rais’d their voices loud, to quell
The storm of tongues, and bade the noisy crowd
Be still, and listen to the Heav’n-born Kings.

At length they all were seated, and awhile
Their clamours sank to silence; then uprose
The monarch Agamemnon, in his hand
His royal staff, the work of Vulcan’s art;
Which Vulcan to the son of Saturn gave;
To Hermes he, the heav’nly messenger;
Hermes to Pelops, matchless charioteer;
Pelops to Atreus; Atreus at his death
Bequeath’d it to Thyestes, wealthy Lord
Of num’rous herds; to Agamemnon last
Thyestes left it; token of his sway
O’er all the Argive coast, and neighbouring isles.
On this the monarch leant, as thus he spoke:
“Friends, Grecian Heroes, Ministers of Mars!
Grievous, and all unlook’d for, is the blow
Which Jove hath dealt me; by his promise led
I hop’d to raze the strong-built walls of Troy,
And home return in safety; but it seems
He falsifies his word, and bids me now
Return to Argos, frustrate of my hope,
Dishonour’d, and with grievous loss of men.
Such now appears th’ o’er-ruling sov’reign will
Of Saturn’s son; who oft hath sunk the heads
Of many a lofty city in the dust,
And yet will sink; for mighty is his hand.
’Tis shame indeed that future days should hear
How such a force as ours, so great, so brave,
Hath thus been baffled, fighting, as we do,
’Gainst numbers far inferior to our own,
And see no end of all our warlike toil.
For should we choose, on terms of plighted truce,
Trojans and Greeks, to number our array;
Of Trojans, all that dwell within the town,
And we, by tens disposed, to every ten,
To crown our cups, one Trojan should assign,
Full many a ten no cupbearer would find:
So far the sons of Greece outnumber all
That dwell within the town; but to their aid
Bold warriors come from all the cities round,
Who greatly harass me, and render vain
My hope to storm the strong-built walls of Troy.
Already now nine weary years have pass’d;
The timbers of our ships are all decay’d,
The cordage rotted; in our homes the while
Our wives and helpless children sit, in vain
Expecting our return; and still the work,
For which we hither came, remains undone.
Hear then my counsel; let us all agree
Home to direct our course, since here in vain
We strive to take the well-built walls of Troy.”

Thus as he spoke, the crowd, that had not heard
The secret council, by his words was mov’d;
So sway’d and heav’d the multitude, as when
O’er the vast billows of th’ Icarian sea
Eurus and Notus from the clouds of Heav’n
Pour forth their fury; or as some deep field
Of wavy corn, when sweeping o’er the plain
The ruffling west wind sways the bending ears;
So was th’ Assembly stirr’d; and tow’rd the ships
With clam’rous joy they rush’d; beneath, their feet
Rose clouds of dust, while one to other call’d
To seize the ships and drag them to the main.
They clear’d the channels, and with shouts of “home”
That rose to Heav’n, they knock’d the shores away.
Then had the Greeks in shameful flight withdrawn,
Had Juno not to Pallas thus appeal’d:
“Oh Heav’n! brave child of aegis-bearing Jove,
Shall thus the Greeks, in ignominious flight,
O’er the wide sea their homeward course pursue,
And as a trophy to the sons of Troy
The Argive Helen leave, on whose account,
Far from their home, so many valiant Greeks
Have cast their lives away? Go quickly thou
Amid the brass-clad Greeks, and man by man
Address with words persuasive, nor permit
To launch their well-trimm’d vessels on the deep.”

She said, nor did Minerva not obey,
But swift descending from Olympus’ heights
With rapid flight she reach’d the Grecian ships.
Laertes’ son, in council sage as Jove
There found she standing; he no hand had laid
On his dark vessel, for with bitter grief
His heart was filled; the blue-ey’d Maid approach’d,
And thus address’d him: “Great Laertes’ son,
Ulysses, sage in council, can it be
That you, the men of Greece, embarking thus
On your swift ships, in ignominious flight,
O’er the wide sea will take your homeward way,
And as a trophy to the sons of Troy
The Argive Helen leave, on whose account
Far from their homes so many valiant Greeks
Have cast their lives away? Go quickly thou
Among the multitude, and man by man
Address with words persuasive, nor permit
To launch their well-trimm’d vessels on the deep.”

She said; the heav’nly voice Ulysses knew;
Straight, springing to the course, he cast aside,
And to Eurybates of Ithaca,
His herald and attendant, threw his robe;
Then to Atrides hasten’d, and by him
Arm’d with his royal staff ancestral, pass’d
With rapid step amid the ships of Greece.
Each King or leader whom he found he thus
With cheering words encourag’d and restrain’d:
“O gallant friend, ’tis not for thee to yield,
Like meaner men, to panic; but thyself
Sit quiet, and the common herd restrain.
Thou know’st not yet Atrides’ secret mind:
He tries us now, and may reprove us soon.
His words in council reach’d not all our ears:
See that he work us not some ill; for fierce
His anger; and the Lord of counsel, Jove,
From whom proceeds all honour, loves him well.”

But of the common herd whome’er he found
Clam’ring, he check’d with staff and threat’ning words:
“Good friend, keep still, and hear what others say,
Thy betters far: for thou art good for nought,
Of small account in council or in fight.
All are not sovereigns here: ill fares the state
Where many masters rule; let one be Lord,
One King supreme; to whom wise Saturn’s son
In token of his sov’reign power hath giv’n
The sceptre’s sway and ministry of law.”

Such were his words, as through the ranks he pass’d:
They from the vessels and the tents again
Throng’d to th’ Assembly, with such rush of sound,
As when the many-dashing ocean’s wave
Breaks on the shore, and foams the frothing sea.
The others all were settled in their seats:
Only Thersites, with unmeasur’d words,
Of which he had good store, to rate the chiefs,
Not over-seemly, but wherewith he thought
To move the crowd to laughter, brawl’d aloud.
The ugliest man was he who came to Troy:
With squinting eyes, and one distorted foot,
His shoulders round, and buried in his breast
His narrow head, with scanty growth of hair.
Against Achilles and Ulysses most
His hate was turn’d; on them his venom pour’d;
Anon, at Agamemnon’s self he launch’d
His loud-tongued ribaldry; ’gainst him he knew
Incensed the public mind; and bawling loud,[1]
With scurril words, he thus address’d the King:
“What more, thou son of Atreus, would’st thou have?
Thy tents are full of brass; and in those tents
Many fair women, whom, from all the spoil,
We Greeks, whene’er some wealthy town we take,
Choose first of all, and set apart for thee.
Or dost thou thirst for gold, which here perchance
Some Trojan brings, the ransom of his son
Captur’d by me, or by some other Greek?
Or some new girl, to gratify thy lust,
Kept for thyself apart? a leader, thou
Shouldst not to evil lead the sons of Greece.
Ye slaves! ye coward souls! Women of Greece!
I will not call you men! why go we not
Home with our ships, and leave this mighty chief
To gloat upon his treasures, and find out
Whether in truth he need our aid, or no;
Who on Achilles, his superior far,
Foul scorn hath cast, and robb’d him of his prize,
Which for himself he keeps? Achilles, sure,
Is not intemperate, but mild of mood;
Else, Atreus’ son, this insult were thy last.”

On Agamemnon, leader of the host,
With words like these Thersites pour’d his hate;
But straight Ulysses at his side appear’d,
And spoke, with scornful glance, in stern rebuke:
“Thou babbling fool, Thersites, prompt of speech,
Restrain thy tongue, nor singly thus presume
The Kings to slander; thou, the meanest far
Of all that with the Atridae came to Troy.
Ill it beseems, that such an one as thou
Should lift thy voice against the Kings, and rail
With scurril ribaldry, and prate of home.
How these affairs may end, we know not yet;
Nor how, or well or ill, we may return.
Cease then against Atrides, King of men,
To pour thy spite, for that the valiant Greeks
To him, despite thy railing, as of right
An ample portion of the spoils assign.
But this I tell thee, and will make it good,
If e’er I find thee play the fool, as now,
Then may these shoulders cease this head to bear,
And may my son Telemachus no more
Own me his father, if I strip not off
Thy mantle and thy garments, aye, expose
Thy nakedness, and flog thee to the ships
Howling, and scourg’d with ignominious stripes.”

Thus as he spoke, upon Thersites’ neck
And back came down his heavy staff; the wretch
Shrank from the blow, and scalding tears let fall.
Where struck the golden-studded staff, appear’d
A bloody weal: Thersites quail’d, and down,
Quiv’ring with pain, he sat, and wip’d away.
With horrible grimace, the trickling tears.
The Greeks, despite their anger, laugh’d aloud,
And one to other said, “Good faith, of all
The many works Ulysses well hath done,
Wise in the council, foremost in the fight,
He ne’er hath done a better, than when now
He makes this scurril babbler hold his peace.
Methinks his headstrong spirit will not soon
Lead him again to vilify the Kings.”

Thus spoke the gen’ral voice: but, staff in hand,
Ulysses rose; Minerva by his side,
In likeness of a herald, bade the crowd
Keep silence, that the Greeks, from first to last,
Might hear his words, and ponder his advice.
He thus with prudent phrase his speech began:
“Great son of Atreus, on thy name, O King,
Throughout the world will foul reproach be cast,
If Greeks forget their promise, nor make good
The vow they took to thee, when hitherward
We sailed from Argos’ grassy plains, to raze,
Ere our return, the well-built walls of Troy.
But now, like helpless widows, or like babes,
They mourn their cruel fate, and pine for home.
’Tis hard indeed defeated to return;
The seaman murmurs, if from wife and home,
Ev’n for one month, his well-found bark be stay’d,
Toss’d by the wint’ry blasts and stormy sea;
But us the ninth revolving year beholds
Still ling’ring here: I cannot therefore blame
Our valiant Greeks, if by the ships I hear
Their murmurs; yet ’twere surely worst of all
Long to remain, and bootless to return.
Bear up, my friends, remain awhile, and see
If Calchas truly prophesy, or no.
For this ye all have seen, and can yourselves
Bear witness, all who yet are spar’d by fate,
Not long ago, when ships of Greece were met
At Aulis, charg’d with evil freight for Troy,
And we, around a fountain, to the Gods
Our altars rear’d, with faultless hecatombs,
Near a fair plane-tree, where bright water flow’d,
Behold a wonder! by Olympian Jove
Sent forth to light, a snake, with burnish’d scales,
Of aspect fearful, issuing from beneath
The altars, glided to the plane-tree straight.
There, on the topmost bough, beneath the leaves
Cow’ring, a sparrow’s callow nestlings lay;
Eight fledglings, and the parent bird the ninth.
All the eight nestlings, utt’ring piercing cries,
The snake devour’d; and as the mother flew,
Lamenting o’er her offspring, round and round,
Uncoiling, caught her, shrieking, by the wing.
Then, when the sparrow’s nestlings and herself
The snake had swallowed, by the God, who first
Sent him to light, a miracle was wrought:
For Jove, the deep-designing Saturn’s son,
Turn’d him to stone; we stood, and wond’ring gaz’d.
But when this prodigy befell our rites,
Calchas, inspir’d of Heaven, took up his speech:
‘Ye long-haired sons of Greece, why stand ye thus
In mute amaze? to us Olympian Jove,
To whom be endless praise, vouchsafes this sign,
Late sent, of late fulfilment: as ye saw
The snake devour the sparrow and her young,
Eight nestlings, and the parent bird the ninth:
So, for so many years, are we condemn’d
To wage a fruitless war; but in the tenth
The wide-built city shall at last be ours.’
Thus he foretold, and now the time is come.
Here then, ye well-greav’d Greeks, let all remain,
Till Priam’s wealthy city be our own.”

He said, and loudly cheer’d the Greeks—and loud
From all the hollow ships came back the cheers—
In admiration of Ulysses’ speech.
Gerenian Nestor next took up the word:
“Like children, Grecian warriors, ye debate;
Like babes to whom unknown are feats of arms.
Where then are now our solemn covenants,
Our plighted oaths? Go, cast we to the fire
Our councils held, our warriors’ plans matur’d,
Our absolute pledges, and our hand-plight giv’n,
In which our trust was placed; since thus in vain
In words we wrangle, and how long soe’er
We here remain, solution none we find.
Atrides, thou, as is thy wont, maintain
Unchang’d thy counsel; for the stubborn fight
Array the Greeks; and let perdition seize
Those few, those two or three among the host,
Who hold their separate counsel—(not on them
Depends the issue!)—rather than return
To Argos, ere we prove if Jove indeed
Will falsify his promis’d word, or no.
For well I ween, that on the day when first
We Grecians hitherward our course address’d,
To Troy the messengers of blood and death,
Th’ o’er-ruling son of Saturn, on our right
His lightning flashing, with auspicious sign
Assur’d us of his favour; let not then
The thoughts of home be breath’d, ere Trojan wives
Given to our warriors, retribution pay
For wrongs by us, in Helen’s cause, sustain’d.
But whoso longs, if such an one there be,
To make his homeward voyage, let him take
His well-rigg’d bark, and go; before the rest
To meet the doom of death! But thou, O King!
Be well advis’d thyself, and others lead
By wholesome counsel; for the words I speak
Are not to be despis’d; by tribes and clans,
O Agamemnon! range thy troops, that so
Tribe may to tribe give aid, and clan to clan.
If thus thou do, and Greeks thy words obey,
Then shalt thou see, of chiefs and troops alike,
The good and bad; for on their own behoof
They all shall fight; and if thou fail, shalt know
Whether thy failure be of Heav’n’s decree,
Or man’s default and ignorance of war.”

To whom the monarch Agamemnon thus:
“Father, in council, of the sons of Greece,
None can compare with thee; and would to Jove
To Pallas, and Apollo, at my side
I had but ten such counsellors as thee!
Then soon should royal Priam’s city fall,
Tak’n and destroy’d by our victorious hands.
But now on me hath aegis-bearing Jove,
The son of Saturn, fruitless toil impos’d,
And hurtful quarrels; for in wordy war
About a girl, Achilles and myself
Engag’d; and I, alas! the strife began:
Could we be friends again, delay were none,
How short soe’er, of Ilium’s final doom.
But now to breakfast, ere we wage the fight.
Each sharpen well his spear, his shield prepare,
Each to his fiery steeds their forage give,
Each look his chariot o’er, that through the day
We may unwearied stem the tide of war;
For respite none, how short soe’er, shall be
Till night shall bid the storm of battle cease.
With sweat shall reek upon each warrior’s breast
The leathern belt beneath the cov’ring shield;
And hands shall ache that wield the pond’rous spear:
With sweat shall reek the fiery steeds that draw
Each warrior’s car; but whomsoe’er I find
Loit’ring beside the beaked ships, for him
’Twere hard to’scape the vultures and the dogs.”

He said; and from th’ applauding ranks of Greece
Rose a loud sound, as when the ocean wave,
Driv’n by the south wind on some lofty beach,
Dashes against a prominent crag, expos’d
To blasts from every storm that roars around.
Uprising then, and through the camp dispers’d
They took their sev’ral ways, and by their tents
The fires they lighted, and the meal prepar’d;
And each to some one of the Immortal Gods
His off’ring made, that in the coming fight
He might escape the bitter doom of death.
But to the o’erruling son of Saturn, Jove,
A sturdy ox, well-fatten’d, five years old,
Atrides slew; and to the banquet call’d
The aged chiefs and councillors of Greece;
Nestor the first, the King Idomeneus,
The two Ajaces next, and Tydeus’ son,
Ulysses sixth, as Jove in council sage.
But uninvited Menelaus came,
Knowing what cares upon his brother press’d.
Around the ox they stood, and on his head
The salt cake sprinkled; then amid them all
The monarch Agamemnon pray’d aloud:
“Most great, most glorious Jove! who dwell’st on high,
In clouds and darkness veil’d, grant Thou that ere
This sun shall set, and night o’erspread the earth,
I may the haughty walls of Priam’s house
Lay prostrate in the dust; and burn with fire
His lofty gates; and strip from Hector’s breast
His sword-rent tunic, while around his corpse
Many brave comrades, prostrate, bite the dust.”

Thus he; but Saturn’s son his pray’r denied;
Receiv’d his off’rings, but his toils increas’d.
Their pray’rs concluded, and the salt cake strewed
Upon the victim’s head, they drew him back,
And slew, and flay’d; then cutting from the thighs
The choicest pieces, and in double layers
O’erspreading them with fat, above them plac’d
The due meat-off’rings; these they burnt with logs
Of leafless timber; and the inward parts,
First to be tasted, o’er the fire they held.
The thighs consum’d with fire, the inward parts
They tasted first; the rest upon the spits
Roasted with care, and from the fire withdrew.
Their labours ended, and the feast prepar’d,
They shared the social meal, nor lacked there aught.
The rage of thirst and hunger satisfied,
Gerenian Nestor thus his speech began:
“Most mighty Agamemnon, King of men,
Great Atreus’ son, no longer let us pause,
The work delaying which the pow’rs of Heav’n
Have trusted to our hands; do thou forthwith
Bid that the heralds proclamation make,
And summon through the camp the brass-clad Greeks;
While, in a body, through the wide-spread ranks
We pass, and stimulate their warlike zeal.”

He said; and Agamemnon, King of men,
Obedient to his counsel, gave command
That to the war the clear-voic’d heralds call
The long-hair’d Greeks: they gave the word, and straight
From ev’ry quarter throng’d the eager crowd.
The Heav’n-born Kings, encircling Atreus’ son,
The troops inspected: Pallas, blue-ey’d Maid,
Before the chiefs her glorious aegis bore,
By time untouch’d, immortal: all around
A hundred tassels hung, rare works of art,
All gold, each one a hundred oxen’s price.
With this the Goddess pass’d along the ranks,
Exciting all; and fix’d in every breast
The firm resolve to wage unwearied war;
And dearer to their hearts than thoughts of home
Or wish’d return, became the battle-field.

As when a wasting fire, on mountain tops,
Hath seized the blazing woods, afar is seen
The glaring light; so, as they mov’d, to Heav’n
Flash’d the bright glitter of their burnish’d arms.

As when a num’rous flock of birds, or geese,
Or cranes, or long-neck’d swans, on Asian mead,
Beside Cayster’s stream, now here, now there,
Disporting, ply their wings; then settle down
With clam’rous noise, that all the mead resounds;
So to Scamander’s plain, from tents and ships,
Pour’d forth the countless tribes; the firm earth groan’d
Beneath the tramp of steeds and armed men.
Upon Scamander’s flow’ry mead they stood,
Unnumber’d as the vernal leaves and flow’rs.

Or as the multitudinous swarms of flies,
That round the cattle-sheds in spring-tide pour,
While the warm milk is frothing in the pail:
So numberless upon the plain, array’d
For Troy’s destruction, stood the long-hair’d Greeks.
And as experienced goat-herds, when their flocks
Are mingled in the pasture, portion out
Their sev’ral charges, so the chiefs array’d
Their squadrons for the fight; while in the midst
The mighty monarch Agamemnon mov’d:
His eye, and lofty brow, the counterpart
Of Jove, the Lord of thunder; in his girth
Another Mars, with Neptune’s ample chest.
As ’mid the thronging heifers in a herd
Stands, proudly eminent, the lordly bull;
So, by Jove’s will, stood eminent that day,
’Mid many heroes, Atreus’ godlike son.

Say now, ye Nine, who on Olympus dwell,
Muses (for ye are Goddesses, and ye
Were present, and know all things: we ourselves
But hear from Rumour’s voice, and nothing know),
Who were the chiefs and mighty Lords of Greece.
But should I seek the multitude to name,
Not if ten tongues were mine, ten mouths to speak,
Voice inexhaustible, and heart of brass,
Should I succeed, unless, Olympian maids,
The progeny of aegis-bearing Jove,
Ye should their names record, who came to Troy.
The chiefs, and all the ships, I now rehearse.

Bœotia’s troops by Peneleus were led,
And Leitus, and Prothoenor bold,
Arcesilas and Clonius: they who dwelt
In Hyria, and on Aulis’ rocky coast,
Scoenus, and Scolus, and the highland range
Of Eteonus; in Thespeia’s vale,
Graia, and Mycalessus’ wide-spread plains:
And who in Harma and Eilesium dwelt,
And in Erythrae, and in Eleon,
Hyle, and Peteon, and Ocalea,
In Copae, and in Medeon’s well-built fort,
Eutresis, Thisbe’s dove-frequented woods,
And Coronca, and the grassy meads
Of Haliartus; and Plataea’s plain,
In Glissa, and the foot of Lower Thebes,
And in Anchestus, Neptune’s sacred grove;
And who in viny-cluster’d Arne dwelt,
And in Mideia, and the lovely site
Of Nissa, and Anthedon’s utmost bounds.
With these came fifty vessels; and in each
Were six score youths, Bœotia’s noblest flow’r.

Who in Aspledon dwelt, and in Minyas’ realm
Orehomenus, two sons of Mars obey’d,
Ascalaphus, and bold Ialmenus;
In Actor’s house, the son of Azeus, born
Of fair Astyoche, a maiden pure,
Till in the upper chamber, where she slept,
Stout Mars by stealth her virgin bed assail’d:
Of these came thirty ships in order due.

By Schedius and Epistrophus, the sons
Of great Iphitus, son of Naubolus,
Were led the Phocian forces; these were they
Who dwelt in Cyparissus, and the rock
Of Python, and on Crissa’s lovely plain;
And who in Daulis, and in Panope,
Anemorea and IIyampolis,
And by Cephisus’ sacred waters dwelt,
Or in Lilaea, by Cephisus’ springs.
In their command came forty dark-ribb’d ships.
These were the leaders of the Phocian bands,
And on Bœotia’s left their camp was pitch’d.

Ajax, Oileus’ son, the Locrians led;
Swift-footed, less than Ajax Telamon,
Of stature low, with linen breastplate arm’d:
But skill’d to throw the spear o’er all who dwell
In Hellas or Achaia: these were they
From Cynos, Opus, and Calliarus,
Bessa, and Scarpha, and Augaea fair,
Tarpha, and Thronium, by Boagrius’ stream.
Him from beyond Euboea’s sacred isle,
Of Locrians follow’d forty dark-ribb’d ships.

Breathing firm courage high, th’ Abantian host,
Who from Euboea and from Chalcis came,
Or who in vine-clad Histiaea dwelt,
Eretria, and Cerinthus maritime,
And who the lofty fort of Dium held,
And in Carystus and in Styra dwelt:
These Elephenor led, true plant of Mars,
Chalcodon’s son, the brave Abantian chief.
Him, all conspicuous with their long black hair,
The bold Abantians follow’d: spearmen skill’d,
Who through the foemen’s breastplates knew full well,
Held in firm grasp, to drive the ashen spear.
In his command came forty dark-ribb’d ships.

Those who in Athens’ well-built city dwelt,
The noble-soul’d Erectheus’ heritage;
Child of the fertile soil, by Pallas rear’d,
Daughter of Jove, who him in Athens plac’d
In her own wealthy temple; there with blood
Of bulls and lambs, at each revolving year,
The youths of Athens do him sacrifice;
These by Menestheus, Peteus’ son, were led.
With him might none of mortal men compare,
In order due of battle to array
Chariots and buckler’d men; Nestor alone
Perchance might rival him, his elder far.
In his command came fifty dark-ribb’d ships.

Twelve ships from Salamis with Ajax came,
And they beside th’ Athenian troops were rang’d.

Those who from Argos, and the well-wall’d town
Of Tyrins came, and from Hermione,
And Asine, deep-bosom’d in the bay;
And from Troezene and Eione,
And vine-clad Epidaurus; and the youths
Who dwelt in Mases, and Ægina’s isle;
O’er all of these the valiant Diomed
Held rule; and Sthenelus, th’ illustrious son
Of far-fam’d Capaneus; with these, the third,
A godlike warrior came, Euryalus,
Son of Mecistheus, Talaus’ royal son.
Supreme o’er all was valiant Diomed.
In their command came eighty dark-ribb’d ships.

Who in Mycenæ’s well-built fortress dwelt,
And wealthy Corinth, and Cleone fair,
Orneia, and divine Araethure,
And Sicyon, where Adrastus reign’d of old,
And Gonoessa’s promontory steep,
And Hyperesia, and Pellene’s rock;
Ægina, and the scatter’d towns that lie
Along the beach, and wide-spread Helice;
Of these a hundred ships obey’d the rule
Of mighty Agamemnon, Atreus’ son.
The largest and the bravest host was his;
And he himself, in dazzling armour clad,
O’er all the heroes proudly eminent,
Went forth exulting in his high estate,
Lord of the largest host, and chief of chiefs.

Those who in Lacedaemon’s lowland plains,
And who in Sparta and in Phare dwelt,
And who on Messa’s dove-frequented cliffs,
Bryseia, and Ægaea’s lovely vale,
And in Amyclae, and the sea-bathed fort
Of Helos, Œtylus and Laas dwelt;
His valiant brother Menelaus led,
With sixty ships; but ranged apart they lay.
Their chief, himself in martial ardour bold,
Inspiring others, fill’d with fierce desire
The rape of Helen and his wrongs to avenge.

They who in Pylos and Arene dwelt,
And Thyrum, by the ford of Alpheus’ stream,
In Cyparissus and Amphigene,
Pteleon, and lofty Œpus’ well-built fort,
Helos, and Dorium, where the Muses met,
And put to silence Thracian Thamyris,
As from Œchalia, from the royal house
Of Eurytus he came; he, over-bold,
Boasted himself pre-eminent in song,
Ev’n though the daughters of Olympian Jove,
The Muses, were his rivals: they in wrath
Him of his sight at once and powr’r of song
Amerc’d, and bade his hand forget the lyre.
These by Gerenian Nestor all were led,
In fourscore ships and ten in order due.

They of Arcadia, and the realm that lies
Beneath Cyllene’s mountain high, around
The tomb of Æpytus, a warrior race;
The men of Pheneus and Orchomenus
In flocks abounding; who in Ripa dwelt,
In Stratia, and Enispe’s breezy height,
Or Tegea held, and sweet Mantinea,
Stymphalus and Parrhasia; these were led
By Agapenor brave, Anchaeus’ son,
In sixty ships; in each a num’rous crew
Of stout Arcadian youths, to war inur’d.
The ships, wherewith they crossed the dark-blue sea,
Were giv’n by Agamemnon, King of men,
The son of Atreus; for th’ Arcadian youth
Had ne’er to maritime pursuits been train’d.

Who in Buprasium and in Elis dwelt,
Far as Hyrmine, and th’ extremest bounds
Of Myrsinus; and all the realm that lies
Between Aleisium and the Olenian rock;
These by four chiefs were led; and ten swift ships,
By bold Epeians mann’d, each chief obey’d.
Amphimachus and Thalpius were the first,
Sons of two brothers, Cteatus the one,
The other Eurytus, to Actor born;
Next Amarynceus’ son, Diores bold;
The fourth Polyxenus, the godlike son
Of Augeas’ royal heir, Agasthenes.

They of Dulichium, and the sacred isles,
Th’ Echinades, which face, from o’er the sea,
The coast of Elis, were by Meges led,
The son of Phyleus, dear to Jove, in arms
Valiant as Mars; who, with his sire at feud,
Had left his home, and to Dulichium come:
In his command were forty dark-ribb’d ships.

Those who from warlike Cephalonia came,
And Ithaca, and leafy Neritus,
And Crocyleium; rugged Ægilips,
And Samos, and Zacynthus, and the coast
Of the mainland with its opposing isles;
These in twelve ships, with scarlet-painted bows,
Ulysses led, in council sage as Jove.

Thoas, Andraemon’s son, th’ Ætolians led;
From Pleuron, and Pylone, Olenus,
Chalcis-by-sea, and rocky Calydon:
The race of Œneus was no more; himself,
And fair-hair’d Meleager, both were dead:
Whence all Ætolia’s rule on him was laid.
In his command came forty dark-ribb’d ships.

The King Idomeneus the Cretans led,
From Cnossus, and Gortyna’s well-wall’d town,
Miletus, and Lycastus’ white-stone cliffs,
Lyctus, and Phaestus, Rhytium, and the rest
Whom Crete from all her hundred cities sent:
These all Idomeneus, a spearman skill’d,
Their King, commanded; and Meriones,
In battle terrible as blood-stain’d Mars.
In their command came fourscore dark-ribb’d ships.

Valiant and tall, the son of Hercules,
Tlepolemus, nine vessels brought from Rhodes,
By gallant Rhodians mann’d, who tripartite
Were settled, and in Ialyssus dwelt,
In Lindus, and Cameirus’ white-stone hills.
These all renown’d Tlepolemus obey’d,
Who to the might of Hercules was born
Of fair Astyoche; his captive she,
When many a goodly town his arms had raz’d,
Was brought from Ephyra, by Selles’ stream.
Rear’d in the royal house, Tlepolemus,
In early youth, his father’s uncle slew,
A warrior once, but now in life’s decline,
Lycimnius; then in haste a fleet he built,
Muster’d a num’rous host; and fled, by sea,
The threaten’d vengeance of the other sons
And grandsons of the might of Hercules.
Long wand’rings past, and toils and perils borne,
To Rhodes he came; his followers, by their tribes,
Three districts form’d; and so divided, dwelt,
Belov’d of Jove, the King of Gods and men,
Who show’r’d upon them boundless store of wealth.

Nireus three well-trimm’d ships from Syme brought;
Nireus, to Charops whom Aglaia bore;
Nireus, the goodliest man of all the Greeks,
Who came to Troy, save Peleus’ matchless son:
But scant his fame, and few the troops he led.

Who in Nisyrus dwelt, and Carpathus,
And Cos, the fortress of Eurypylus,
And in the Casian and Calydnian Isles,
Were by Phidippus led, and Antiphus,
Two sons of Thessalus, Alcides’ son;
With them came thirty ships in order due.

Next those who in Pelasgian Argos dwelt,
And who in Alos, and in Alope,
Trachys, and Phthia, and in Hellas fam’d
For women fair; of these, by various names,
Achaians, Myrmidons, Hellenes, known,
In fifty ships, Achilles was the chief.
But from the battle-strife these all abstain’d,
Since none there was to marshal their array.
For Peleus’ godlike son, the swift of foot,
Lay idly in his tent, the loss resenting
Of Brises’ fair-hair’d daughter; whom himself
Had chosen, prize of all his warlike toil,
When he Lyrnessus and the walls of Thebes
O’erthrew, and Mynes and Epistrophus
Struck down, bold warriors both, Evenus’ sons,
Selepius’ royal heir; for her in wrath,
He held aloof, but soon again to appear.

Those in the flow’ry plain of Pyrrhasus,
To Ceres dear, who dwelt; in Phylace,
In Iton, rich in flocks, and, by the sea,
In Antron, and in Pteleon’s grass-clad meads;
These led Protesilaus, famed in arms,
While yet he liv’d; now laid beneath the sod.
In Phylace were left his weeping wife,
And half-built house; him, springing to the shore,
First of the Greeks, a Dardan warrior slew.
Nor were his troops, their leader though they mourn’d,
Left leaderless; the post of high command
Podarces claim’d of right, true plant of Mars,
Iphiclus’ son, the rich Phylacides;
The brother of Protesilaus he,
Younger in years, nor equal in renown;
Yet of a chief no want the forces felt,
Though much they mourn’d their valiant leader slain.
In his command came forty dark-ribb’d ships.

Those who from Pherae came, beside the lake
Boebeis, and who dwelt in Glaphyrae,
In Boebe, and Iolcos’ well-built fort,
These in eleven ships Eumelus led,
Whom Pelias’ daughter, fairest of her race,
Divine Alcestis to Admetus bore.

Who in Methone and Thaumacia dwelt,
In Meliboea and Olizon’s rock;
These Philoctetes, skilful archer, led.
Sev’n ships were theirs, and ev’ry ship was mann’d
By fifty rowers, skilful archers all.
But he, their chief, was lying, rack’d with pain,
On Lemnos’ sacred isle; there left perforce
In torture from a venomous serpent’s wound:
There he in anguish lay: nor long, ere Greeks
Of royal Philoctetes felt their need.
Yet were his troops, their leader though they mourn’d,
Not leaderless: Oileus’ bastard son,
Medon, of Rhene born, their ranks array’d.

Who in Œchalia, Eurytus’ domain,
In Tricca, and in rough Ithome dwelt,
These Podalirius and Machaon led,
Two skilful leeches, Æsculapius’ sons.
Of these came thirty ships in order due.

Who in Ormenium and Asterium dwelt,
By Hypereia’s fount, and on the heights
Of Titanum’s white peaks, of these was chief
Eurypylus, Euaemon’s gallant son;
In his command came forty dark-ribb’d ships.

Who in Argissa and Gyrtona dwelt,
Ortha, Elone, and the white-wall’d town
Of Oloosson, Polypoetes led;
Son of Pirithous, progeny of Jove,
A warrior bold; Hippodamia fair
Him to Pirithous bore, what time he slew
The shaggy Centaurs, and from Pelion’s heights
For refuge ’mid the rude Æthices drove.
Nor he alone; with him to Troy there came
A scion true of Mars, Leonteus, heir
Of nobly-born Coronus, Caeneus’ son.
In their command came forty dark-ribb’d ships.

With two and twenty vessels Gouneus came
From Cythus; he the Enienes led,
And the Peraebians’ warlike tribes, and those
Who dwelt around Dodona’s wintry heights,
Or till’d the soil upon the lovely banks
Of Titaresius, who to Peneus pours
The tribute of his clearly-flowing stream;
Yet mingles not with Peneus’ silver waves,
But on the surface floats like oil, his source
From Styx deriving, in whose awful name
Both Gods and men by holiest oaths are bound.

Magnesia’s troops, who dwelt by Peneus’ stream,
Or beneath Pelion’s leafy-quiv’ring shades,
Swift-footed Prothous led, Tenthredon’s son;
In his command came forty dark-ribb’d ships.

These were the leaders and the chiefs of Greece:
Say, Muse, of these, who with th’ Atridae came,
Horses and men, who claim’d the highest praise.
Of steeds, the bravest and the noblest far
Were those Eumelus drove, Admetus’ son:
Both swift as birds, in age and colour match’d,
Alike in height, as measur’d o’er the back;
Both mares, by Phoebus of the silver bow
Rear’d in Pieria, thunderbolts of war.
Of men, while yet Achilles held his wrath,
The mightiest far was Ajax Telamon.
For with Achilles, and the steeds that bore
The matchless son of Peleus, none might vie:
But ’mid his beaked ocean-going ships
He lay, with Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
Indignant; while his troops upon the beach
With quoits and jav’lins whil’d away the day,
And feats of archery; their steeds the while
The lotus-grass and marsh-grown parsley cropp’d,
Each standing near their car; the well-wrought cars
Lay all unheeded in the warriors’ tents;
They, inly pining for their godlike chief,
Roam’d listless up and down, nor join’d the fray.

Such was the host, which, like devouring fire,
O’erspread the land; the earth beneath them groan’d:
As when the Lord of thunder, in his wrath,
The earth’s foundations shakes, in Arimi,
Where, buried deep, ’tis said, Typhoeus lies;
So at their coming, groan’d beneath their feet
The earth, as quickly o’er the plain they spread.

To Troy, sent down by aegis-bearing Jove,
With direful tidings storm-swift Iris came.
At Priam’s gate, in solemn conclave met,
Were gather’d all the Trojans, young and old:
Swift Iris stood amidst them, and, the voice
Assuming of Polites, Priam’s son,
The Trojan scout, who, trusting to his speed,
Was posted on the summit of the mound
Of ancient Æsuetes, there to watch
Till from their ships the Grecian troops should march;
His voice assuming, thus the Goddess spoke:
“Old man, as erst in peace, so still thou lov’st
The strife of words; but fearful war is nigh.
Full many a host in line of battle rang’d
My eyes have seen; but such a force as this,
So mighty and so vast, I ne’er beheld:
In number as the leaves, or as the sand,
Against the city o’er the plain they come.
Then, Hector, for to thee I chiefly speak,
This do; thou know’st how various our allies,
Of diff’rent nations and discordant tongues:
Let each then those command o’er whom he reigns,
And his own countrymen in arms array.”
She said; and Hector knew the voice divine,
And all, dissolv’d the council, flew to arms,
The gates were open’d wide; forth pour’d the crowd,
Both foot and horse; and loud the tumult rose.

Before the city stands a lofty mound,
In the mid plain, by open space enclos’d;
Men call it Batiaea; but the Gods
The tomb of swift Myrinna; muster’d there
The Trojans and Allies their troops array’d.

The mighty Hector of the glancing helm,
The son of Priam, led the Trojan host:
The largest and the bravest band were they,
Bold spearmen all, who follow’d him in arms.

Anchises’ valiant son, Æneas, led
The Dardans; him, ’mid Ida’s jutting peaks,
Immortal Venus to Anchises bore,
A Goddess yielding to a mortal’s love:
With him, well skill’d in war, Archilochus
And Acamas, Antenor’s gallant sons.

Who in Zeleia dwelt, at Ida’s foot,
Of Trojan race, a wealthy tribe, who drank
Of dark Æsepus’ waters, these were led
By Pandarus, Lycaon’s noble son,
Taught by Apollo’s self to draw the bow.

Who from Adraste, and Apaesus’ realm,
From Pityeia, and the lofty hill
Tereian came, with linen corslets girt,
Adrastus and Amphius led; two sons
Of Merops of Percote; deeply vers’d
Was he in prophecy; and from the war
Would fain have kept his sons; but they, by fate,
Doom’d to impending death, his caution scorn’d.

Those who from Practium and Percote came,
And who in Sestos and Abydos dwelt,
And in Arisba fair; those Asius led,
The son of Hyrtacus, of heroes chief;
Asius the son of Hyrtacus, who came
From fair Arisba, borne by fiery steeds
Of matchless size and strength, from Selles’ stream.

Hippothous led the bold Pelasgian tribes,
Who dwell in rich Larissa’s fertile soil,
Hippothous and Pylaeus, Lethus’ sons,
The son of Teutamus, Pelasgian chief.

The Thracians, by fast-flowing Hellespont
Encompass’d, Acamas and Peirous brave;
The spear-skill’d Cicones Euphemus led,
Son of Troezenus, Ceus’ highborn son.

From distant Amydon Pyraecmes brought
The Paeon archers from broad Axius’ banks;
Axius, the brightest stream on earth that flows.

The hairy strength of great Pylaemenes
The Paphlagonians led from Eneti
(Whence first appear’d the stubborn race of mules),
Who in Cytorus and in Sesamum,
And round Parthenius’ waters had their home;
Who dwelt in Cromne, and Ægialus,
And on the lofty Erythinian rock.

By Hodius and Epistrophus were brought
From distant Alybe, the wealthy source
Of silver ore, the Alizonian bands.

Chromis the Mysians led, and Ennomus;
A skilful augur, but his augury
From gloomy death to save him nought avail’d;
Slain by the son of Peleus, in the stream,
Where many another Trojan felt his arm.

From far Ascania’s lake, with Phorcys join’d,
The godlike presence of Ascanius brought
The Phrygians, dauntless in the standing fight.

From Lydia came Pylaemenes’ two sons,
Born of the lake Gygeian; Antiphus,
And Mesthles; these Maeonia’s forces led,
Who dwelt around the foot of Tmolus’ hill.

In charge of Nastes came the Carian troops,
Of barbarous speech; who in Miletus dwelt,
And in the dense entangled forest shade
Of Phthira’s hill, and on the lofty ridge
Of Mycale, and by Maeander’s stream;
These came with Nastes and Amphimacus;
Amphimacus and Nastes, Nomion’s sons;
With childish folly to the war he came,
Laden with store of gold; yet nought avail’d
His gold to save him from the doom of death;
Slain by the son of Peleus in the stream;
And all his wealth Achilles bore away.

Sarpedon last, and valiant Glaucus led
The Lycian bands, from distant Lycia’s shore,
Beside the banks of Xanthus’ eddying stream.




WHEN by their sev’ral chiefs the troops were rang’d,
With noise and clamour, as a flight of birds,
The men of Troy advanc’d; as when the cranes,
Flying the wintry storms, send forth on high
Their dissonant clamours, while o’er the ocean stream
They steer their course, and on their pinions bear
Battle and death to the Pygmaean race.

On th’ other side the Greeks in silence mov’d,
Breathing firm courage, bent on mutual aid.
As when the south wind o’er the mountain tops
Spreads a thick veil of mist, the shepherd’s bane,
And friendly to the nightly thief alone,
That a stone’s throw the range of vision bounds;
So rose the dust-cloud, as in serried ranks
With rapid step they mov’d across the plain.
But when th’ opposing forces near were met,
A panther’s skin across his shoulders flung,
Arm’d with his bow and sword, in front of all
Advanc’d the godlike Paris; in his hand
He pois’d two brass-tipp’d jav’lins, and defied
To mortal combat all the chiefs of Greece.

Him when the warlike Menelaus saw
With haughty strides advancing from the crowd;
As when a lion, hunger-pinch’d, espies
Some mighty beast of chase, or antler’d stag,
Or mountain goat, and with exulting spring
Strikes down his prey, and on the carcase feeds,
Unscar’d by baying hounds and eager youths:
So Menelaus saw with fierce delight
The godlike Paris; for he deem’d that now
His vengeance was at hand; and from his car,
Arm’d as he was, he leap’d upon the plain.
But when the godlike Paris saw him spring
Defiant from the ranks, with quailing heart,
Back to his comrades’ shelt’ring crowd he sprang,
In fear of death; as when some trav’ller spies,
Coil’d in his path upon the mountain side,
A deadly snake, back he recoils in haste,
His limbs all trembling, and his cheek all pale;
So back recoil’d, in fear of Atreus’ son,
The godlike Paris ’mid the Trojan host.

To whom in stern rebuke thus Hector spoke:
“Thou wretched Paris, though in form so fair,
Thou slave of woman, manhood’s counterfeit!
Would thou hadst ne’er been born, or died at least
Unwedded; so ’twere better far for all,
Than thus to live a scandal and reproach.
Well may the long-hair’d Greeks triumphant boast,
Who think thee, from thine outward show, a chief
Among our warriors; but thou hast in truth
Nor strength of mind, nor courage in the fight.
How was’t that such as thou could e’er induce
A noble band, in ocean-going ships
To cross the main, with men of other lands
Mixing in amity, and bearing thence
A woman, fair of face, by marriage ties
Bound to a race of warriors; to thy sire,
Thy state, thy people, cause of endless grief,
Of triumph to thy foes, contempt to thee!
Durst thou the warlike Menelaus meet,
Thou to thy cost shouldst learn the might of him
Whose bride thou didst not fear to bear away:
Then shouldst thou find of small avail thy lyre,
Or Venus’ gifts of beauty and of grace,
Or, trampled in the dust, thy flowing hair.
But too forbearing are the men of Troy;
Else for the ills that thou hast wrought the state,
Ere now thy body had in stone been cas’d.”

To whom the godlike Paris thus replied:
“Hector, I needs must own thy censure just,
Nor without cause; thy dauntless courage knows
Nor pause nor weariness; but as an axe,
That in a strong man’s hand, who fashions out
Some naval timber, with unbated edge
Cleaves the firm wood, and aids the striker’s force;
Ev’n so unwearied is thy warlike soul.
Yet blame not me for golden Venus’ gifts:
The gifts of Heav’n are not to be despis’d,
Which Heav’n may give, but man could not command.
But if thou wilt that I should dare the fight,
Bid that the Trojans and the Grecians all
Be seated on the ground; and in the midst
The warlike Menelaus and myself
Stand front to front, for Helen and the spoils
Of war to combat; and whoe’er shall prove
The better man in conflict, let him bear
The woman and the spoils in triumph home;
While ye, the rest, in peace and friendship sworn,
Shall still possess the fertile plains of Troy;
And to their native Argos they return,
For noble steeds and lovely women fam’d.”

He said, and Hector joy’d to hear his words:
Forth in the midst he stepp’d, and with his spear
Grasp’d by the middle, stay’d the Trojan ranks.
At him the long-haired Grecians bent their bows,
Prompt to assail with arrows and with stones;
But loud the monarch Agamemnon’s voice
Was heard; “Hold, Argives, hold! ye sons of Greece,
Shoot not! for Hector of the glancing helm
Hath, as it seems, some message to impart.”

He said; they held their hands, and silent stood
Expectant, till to both thus Hector spoke:
“Hear now, ye Trojans, and ye well-greav’d Greeks,
The words of Paris, cause of all this war.
He asks through me that all the host of Troy
And Grecian warriors shall upon the ground
Lay down their glitt’ring arms; while in the midst
The warlike Menelaus and himself
Stand front to front, for Helen and the spoils
Of war to combat; and whoe’er shall prove
The better man in conflict, let him bear
The woman and the spoils in triumph home,
While we, the rest, firm peace and friendship swear.”

Thus Hector spoke; the rest in silence heard;
But Menelaus, bold in fight, replied:
“Hear now my answer; in this quarrel I
May claim the chiefest share; and now I hope
Trojans and Greeks may see the final close
Of all the labours ye so long have borne
T’ avenge my wrong, at Paris’ hand sustain’d.
And of us two whiche’er is doom’d to death,
So let him die! the rest, depart in peace.
Bring then two lambs, one white, the other black,
For Tellus and for Sol; we on our part
Will bring another, for Saturnian Jove:
And let the majesty of Priam too
Appear, himself to consecrate our oaths,
(For reckless are his sons, and void of faith,)
That none Jove’s oath may dare to violate.
For young men’s spirits are too quickly stirr’d;
But in the councils check’d by rev’rend age,
Alike are weigh’d the future and the past,
And for all int’rests due provision made.”

He said, and Greeks and Trojans gladly heard,
In hopes of respite from the weary war.
They rang’d the cars in ranks; and they themselves
Descending doff’d their arms, and laid them down
Close each by each, with narrow space between.
Two heralds to the city Hector sent
To bring the lambs, and aged Priam call;
While Agamemnon to the hollow ships,
Their lamb to bring, in haste Talthybius sent:
He heard, and straight the monarch’s voice obey’d.

Meantime to white-arm’d Helen Iris sped,
The heav’nly messenger: in form she seem’d
Her husband’s sister, whom Antenor’s son,
The valiant Helicaon had to wife,
Laodice, of Priam’s daughters all
Loveliest of face: she in her chamber found
Her whom she sought: a mighty web she wove,
Of double woof and brilliant hues; whereon
Was interwoven many a toilsome strife
Of Trojan warriors and of brass-clad Greeks,
For her encounter’d at the hand of Mars.
Beside her Iris stood, and thus she spoke:
“Come, sister dear, and see the glorious deeds
Of Trojan warriors and of brass-clad Greeks.
They who erewhile, impatient for the fight,
Roll’d o’er the plain the woful tide of war,
Now silent sit, the storm of battle hush’d,
Reclining on their shields, their lances bright
Beside them reared; while Paris in the midst
And warlike Menelaus, stand prepar’d
With the long spear for thee to fight; thyself
The prize of conquest and the victor’s wife.”

Thus as she spoke, in Helen’s breast arose
Fond recollection of her former Lord,
Her home, and parents; o’er her head she threw
A snowy veil; and shedding tender tears
She issu’d forth, not unaccompanied;
For with her went fair Æthra, Pittheus’ child,
And stag-ey’d Clymene, her maidens twain.
They quickly at the Scaean gate arriv’d.

Attending there on aged Priam, sat,
The Elders of the city; Panthous,
And Lampus, and Thymaetes; Clytius,
Bold Icetaon, and Ucalegon,
With sage Antenor, wise in council both:
All these were gather’d at the Scaean gate;
By age exempt from war, but in discourse
Abundant, as the cricket, that on high
From topmost boughs of forest tree sends forth
His delicate music; so on Ilium’s tow’rs
Sat the sage chiefs and councillors of Troy.
Helen they saw, as to the tow’r she came;
And “’tis no marvel,” one to other said,
“The valiant Trojans and the well-greav’d Greeks
For beauty such as this should long endure
The toils of war; for goddess-like she seems;
And yet, despite her beauty, let her go,
Nor bring on us and on our sons a curse.”

Thus they; but aged Priam Helen call’d:
“Come here, my child, and sitting by my side,
From whence thou canst discern thy former Lord,
His kindred, and thy friends (not thee I blame,
But to the Gods I owe this woful war),
Tell me the name of yonder mighty chief
Among the Greeks a warrior brave and strong:
Others in height surpass him; but my eyes
A form so noble never yet beheld,
Nor so august; he moves, a King indeed!”

To whom in answer, Helen, heav’nly fair:
“With rev’rence, dearest father, and with shame
I look on thee: oh would that I had died
That day when hither with thy son I came,
And left my husband, friends, and darling child,
And all the lov’d companions of my youth:
That I died not, with grief I pine away.
But to thy question; I will tell thee true;
Yon chief is Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
Wide-reigning, mighty monarch, ruler good,
And valiant warrior; in my husband’s name,
Lost as I am, I call’d him brother once.”

She spoke: th’ old man admiring gaz’d, and cried,
“Oh bless’d Atrides, child of happy fate,
Favour’d of Heav’n! how many noble Greeks
Obey thy rule! In vine-clad Phrygia once
I saw the hosts of Phrygian warriors wheel
Their rapid steeds; and with them, all the bands
Of Otreus, and of Mygdon, godlike King,
Who lay encamp’d beside Sangarius’ stream:
I too with them was number’d, in the day
When met them in the field the Amazons,
The woman-warriors; but their forces all
Reach’d not the number of the keen-ey’d Greeks.”

Ulysses next the old man saw, and ask’d,
“Tell me again, dear child, who this may be,
In stature less than Atreus’ royal son,
But broader-shoulder’d, and of ampler chest.
His arms are laid upon the fertile plain,
But he himself is moving through the ranks,
Inspecting, like a full-fleec’d ram, that moves
Majestic through a flock of snow-white ewes.”

To whom Jove’s offspring, Helen, thus replied:
“The wise Ulysses that, Laertes’ son:
Though bred in rugged Ithaca, yet vers’d
In ev’ry stratagem, and deep device.”
“O woman,” then the sage Antenor said,
“Of these thy words I can the truth avouch;
For hither when on thine account to treat,
Brave Menelaus and Ulysses came,
I lodg’d them in my house, and lov’d them both,
And studied well the form and mind of each.
As they with Trojans mix’d in social guise,
When both were standing, o’er his comrade high
With broad-set shoulders Menelaus stood;
Seated, Ulysses was the nobler form:
Then, in the great Assembly, when to all
Their public speech and argument they fram’d,
In fluent language Menelaus spoke,
In words though few, yet clear; though young in years,
No wordy babbler, wasteful of his speech:
But when the skill’d Ulysses rose to speak,
With down-cast visage would he stand, his eyes
Bent on the ground; the staff he bore, nor back
He wav’d, nor forward, but like one untaught,
He held it motionless; who only saw
Would say that he was mad, or void of sense;
But when his chest its deep-ton’d voice sent forth,
With words that fell like flakes of wintry snow,
No mortal with Ulysses could compare:
Then little reck’d we of his outward show.”

At sight of Ajax next th’ old man enquir’d;
“Who is yon other warrior, brave and strong,
Tow’ring o’er all with head and shoulders broad?”

To whom, in answer, Helen, heav’nly fair:
“Gigantic Ajax that, the prop of Greece;
And by his side Idomeneus of Crete
Stands godlike, circled round by Cretan chiefs.
The warlike Menelaus welcom’d him
Oft in our palace, when from Crete he came.
Now all the other keen-ey’d Greeks I see,
Whom once I knew, and now could call by name;
But two I miss, two captains of the host,
My own two brethren, and my mother’s sons,
Castor and Pollux; Castor, charioteer
Unrivalled, Pollux, matchless pugilist.
In Lacedaemon have they stay’d behind?
Or can it be, in ocean-going ships
That they have come indeed, but shun to join
The fight of warriors, fearful of the shame,
And deep disgrace that on my name attend?”
Thus she; but they beneath the teeming earth
In Lacedaemon lay, their native land.

Meanwhile the heralds through the city bore
The treaty off’rings to the Gods; the lambs,
And genial wine, the produce of the soil,
In goat-skin flasks: therewith a flagon bright,
And cups of gold, Idaeus brought, and stood
Beside the aged King, as thus he spoke:
“Son of Laomedon, arise! the chiefs
Of Trojan warriors and of brass-clad Greeks
Call for thy presence on the battle-plain
To swear a truce; where Paris in the midst
And warlike Menelaus stand prepar’d
With the long spear for Helen and the spoils
Of war to combat, that whoe’er may prove
The better man in fight, may bear away
The woman and the spoils in triumph home;
While we, the rest, in peace and friendship sworn,
Shall still possess the fertile plains of Troy;
And to their native Argos they return.
For noble steeds and lovely women fam’d.”

He said; the old man shuddered at his words:
But to his comrades gave command forthwith.
To yoke his car; and they his word obey’d.
Priam, ascending, gather’d up the reins,
And with Antenor by his side, the twain
Drove through the Scaean gate their flying steeds.

But when between th’ opposing ranks they came,
Alighting from the car, they mov’d on foot
Between the Trojan and the Grecian hosts.
Uprose then Agamemnon, King of men,
Uprose the sage Ulysses; to the front
The heralds brought the off’rings to the Gods,
And in the flagon mix’d the wine, and pour’d
The hallowing water on the monarchs’ hands.
His dagger then the son of Atreus drew,
Suspended, as was wont, beside the hilt
Of his great sword; and from the victim’s head
He cut the sacred lock, which to the chiefs
Of Troy and Greece the heralds portion’d out.
Then with uplifted hands he pray’d aloud:
“O Father Jove! who rul’st from Ida’s height,
Most great! most glorious! and thou Sun, who see’st
And hearest all things! Rivers! and thou Earth!
And ye, who after death beneath the earth
Your vengeance wreak on souls of men forsworn,
Be witness ye, and this our cov’nant guard.
If Menelaus fall by Paris’ hand,
Let him retain both Helen and the spoil,
While in our ships we take our homeward way;
If Paris be by Menelaus slain,
Troy shall surrender Helen and the spoil,
With compensation due to Greece, that so
A record may to future days remain.
But, Paris slain, if Priam and his sons
The promis’d compensation shall withhold,
Then here, my rights in battle to assert,
Will I remain, till I the end achieve.”

Thus as he spoke, across the victims’ throats
He drew the pitiless blade, and on the ground
He laid them gasping, as the stream of life
Pour’d forth, their vigour by the blade subdued.
Then, from the flagon drawn, from out the cups
The wine they pour’d; and to th’ eternal Gods
They pray’d; and thus from Trojans and from Greeks
Arose the joint petition; “Grant, O Jove!
Most great! most glorious! grant, ye heav’nly pow’rs,
That whosoe’er this solemn truce shall break,
Ev’n as this wine we pour, their hearts’ best blood,
Theirs and their children’s, on the earth be pour’d,
And strangers in subjection take their wives!”

Thus they; but Jove, unyielding, heard their pray’r.
The rites perform’d, then aged Priam spoke:
“Hear me, ye Trojans, and ye well-greav’d Greeks!
To Ilium’s breezy heights I now withdraw,
For that mine eyes will not endure the sight
Of warlike Menelaus and my son
Engag’d in deadly combat; of the two
Which may be doom’d to death, is only known
To Jove, and to th’ immortal pow’rs of Heav’n.”

Thus spoke the godlike King; and on the car
He plac’d the consecrated lambs; himself
Ascending then, he gather’d up the reins,
And with Antenor by his side, the twain
To Ilium’s walls retrac’d their homeward way.

Then Hector, son of Priam, measur’d out,
With sage Ulysses join’d, th’ allotted space;
Next, in the brass-bound helmet cast the lots,
Which of the two the first should throw the spear.
The crowd, with hands uplifted, to the Gods,
Trojans and Greeks alike, address’d their pray’r:
“O Father Jove! who rul’st from Ida’s height,
Most great! most glorious! grant that whosoe’er
On both our armies hath this turmoil brought
May undergo the doom of death, and we,
The rest, firm peace and lasting friendship swear.”

Thus they; great Hector of the glancing helm,
With eyes averted, shook the casque; and forth
Was cast the lot of Paris; on the ground
The rest lay down by ranks, where near to each
Were rang’d his active steeds, and glitt’ring arms.
Then o’er his shoulders fair-hair’d Helen’s Lord,
The godlike Paris, donn’d his armour bright:
First on his legs the well-wrought greaves he fix’d,
Fasten’d with silver clasps; his ample chest
A breastplate guarded, by Lycaon lent,
His brother, but which fitted well his form.
Around his shoulders slung, his sword he bore,
Brass-bladed, silver-studded; then his shield
Weighty and strong; and on his firm-set head
A helm he wore, well wrought, with horsehair plume
That nodded, fearful, o’er his brow; his hand
Grasp’d the firm spear, familiar to his hold.
Prepar’d alike the adverse warrior stood.

They, from the crowd apart their armour donn’d,
Came forth: and each, with eyes of mutual hate,
Regarded each: admiring wonder seiz’d
The Trojan warriors and the well-greav’d Greeks,
As in the centre of the measur’d ground
They stood oppos’d, and pois’d their quiv’ring spears.
First Paris threw his weighty spear, and struck
Fair in the midst Atrides’ buckler round,
But broke not through; upon the stubborn targe
Was bent the lance’s point; then thus to Jove,
His weapon hurling, Menelaus pray’d:
“Great King, on him who wrought me causeless wrong,
On Paris, grant that retribution due
My arm may bring; that men in days to come
May fear their host to injure, and repay
With treach’rous wile his hospitable cares.”

He said, and poising, hurl’d his weighty spear:
Full in the midst it struck the buckler round;
Right through the buckler pass’d the sturdy spear,
And through the gorgeous breastplate, and within
Cut through the linen vest; but Paris, back
Inclining, stoop’d, and shunn’d the doom of death.

Atrides then his silver-studded sword
Rearing on high, a mighty blow let fall
On Paris’ helm; but shiv’ring in his hand
In countless fragments new the faithless blade.
Then thus to Jove, with eyes uplift to Heav’n,
Atrides made his moan: “O Father Jove!
Of all the Gods, the most unfriendly thou!
On Paris’ head I hop’d for all his crimes
To wreak my vengeance due; but in my grasp
My faithless sword is shatter’d, and my spear
Hath bootless left my hand, nor reached my foe.”
Then onward rushing, by the horsehair plume
He seiz’d his foeman’s helm, and wrenching round
Dragg’d by main force amid the well-greav’d Greeks.
The broider’d strap, that, pass’d beneath his beard,
The helmet held, the warrior’s throat compress’d:
Then had Atrides dragg’d him from the field,
And endless fame acquir’d; but Venus, child
Of Jove, her fav’rite’s peril quickly saw.
And broke the throttling strap of tough bull’s hide.
In the broad hand the empty helm remained.
The trophy, by their champion whirl’d amid
The well-greav’d Greeks, his eager comrades seiz’d;
While he, infuriate, rush’d with murd’rous aim
On Priam’s son; but him, the Queen of Love
(As Gods can only) from the field convey’d,
Wrapt in a misty cloud; and on a couch,
Sweet perfumes breathing, gently laid him down;
Then went in search of Helen; her she found,
Circled with Trojan dames, on Ilium’s tow’r:
Her by her airy robe the Goddess held,
And in the likeness of an aged dame
Who oft for her, in Sparta when she dwelt,
Many a fair fleece had wrought, and lov’d her well,
Address’d her thus: “Come, Helen, to thy house;
Come, Paris calls thee; in his chamber he
Expects thee, resting on luxurious couch,
In costly garb, with manly beauty grac’d:
Not from the fight of warriors wouldst thou deem
He late had come, but for the dance prepar’d,
Or resting from the dance’s pleasing toil.”

She said, and Helen’s spirit within her mov’d;
And when she saw the Goddess’ beauteous neck,
Her lovely bosom, and her glowing eyes,
She gaz’d in wonder, and address’d her thus:
“Oh why, great Goddess, make me thus thy sport?
Seek’st thou to bear me far away from hence
To some fair Phrygian or Maeonian town,
If there some mortal have thy favour gain’d?
Or, for that Menelaus in the field
Hath vanquish’d Paris, and is willing yet
That I, his bane, should to his home return;
Here art thou found, to weave again thy wiles!
Go then thyself! thy godship abdicate!
Renounce Olympus! lavish here on him
Thy pity and thy care! he may perchance
Make thee his wife—at least his paramour!
But thither go not I! foul shame it were
Again to share his bed; the dames of Troy
Will for a byword hold me; and e’en now
My soul with endless sorrow is possess’d.”

To whom in anger heav’nly Venus spoke:
“Incense me not, poor fool! lest I in wrath
Desert thee quite, and as I heretofore
Have lov’d, so make thee object of my hate;
And kindle, ’twixt the Trojans and the Greeks,
Such bitter feuds, as both shall wreak on thee.”

She said; and trembled Helen, child of Jove;
She rose in silence; in a snow-white veil
All glitt’ring, shrouded; by the Goddess led
She pass’d, unnotic’d by the Trojan dames.
But when to Paris’ splendid house they came,
Thronging around her, her attendants gave
Their duteous service; through the lofty hall
With queenly grace the godlike woman pass’d.
A seat the laughter-loving Goddess plac’d
By Paris’ side; there Helen sat, the child
Of aegis-bearing Jove, with downcast eyes,
Yet with sharp words she thus address’d her Lord:
“Back from the battle? would thou there hadst died
Beneath a warrior’s arm, whom once I call’d
My husband! vainly didst thou boast erewhile
Thine arm, thy dauntless courage, and thy spear
The warlike Menelaus should subdue!
Go now again, and challenge to the fight
The warlike Menelaus. Be thou ware!
I warn thee, pause, ere madly thou presume
With fair-hair’d Menelaus to contend!
Soon shouldst thou fall beneath his conqu’ring spear.”

To whom thus Paris: “Wring not thus my soul
With keen reproaches: now, with Pallas’ aid,
Hath Menelaus conquer’d; but my day
Will come: I too can boast my guardian Gods.
But turn we now to love, and love’s delights;
For never did thy beauty so inflame
My sense; not when from Lacedaemon first
I bore thee in my ocean-going ships,
And revell’d in thy love on Cranae’s isle,
As now it fills my soul with fond desire.”

He said, and led her to the nuptial couch;
Her Lord she follow’d; and while there reclin’d
Upon the richly-inlaid couch they lay,
Atrides, like a lion baffled, rush’d
Amid the crowd, if haply he might find
The godlike Paris; but not one of all
The Trojans and their brave allies could aid
The warlike Menelaus in his search;
Not that, for love, would any one that knew
Have screen’d him from his anger, for they all
Abhorr’d him as the shade of death: then thus
Outspoke great Agamemnon, King of men:
“Hear me, ye Trojans, Dardans, and Allies!
With warlike Menelaus rests, ’tis plain,
The prize of vict’ry: then surrender ye
The Argive Helen and the spoils of war,
With compensation due to Greece, that so
A record may to future days remain.”

Thus he; the Greeks, assenting, cheer’d his words.





On golden pavement, round the board of Jove,
The Gods were gather’d; Hebe in the midst
Pour’d the sweet nectar; they, in golden cups,
Each other pledg’d, as down they look’d on Troy.
Then Jove, with cutting words and taunting tone,
Began the wrath of Juno to provoke:
“Two Goddesses for Menelaus fight,
Thou, Juno, Queen of Argos, and with thee
Minerva, shield of warriors; but ye two
Sitting aloof, well-pleased it seems, look on;
While laughter-loving Venus, at the side
Of Paris standing, still averts his fate,
And rescues, when, as now, expecting death.
To warlike Menelaus we decree,
Of right, the vict’ry; but consult we now
What may the issue be; if we shall light
Again the name of war and discord fierce,
Or the two sides in peace and friendship join.
For me, if thus your gen’ral voice incline,
Let Priam’s city stand, and Helen back
To warlike Menelaus be restor’d.”

So spoke the God; but seated side by side,
Juno and Pallas glances interchang’d
Of ill portent for Troy; Pallas indeed
Sat silent; and, though inly wroth with Jove,
Yet answer’d not a word; but Juno’s breast
Could not contain her rage, and thus she spoke:
“What words, dread son of Saturn, dost thou speak?
How wouldst thou render vain, and void of fruit,
My weary labour and my horses’ toil,
To stir the people, and on Priam’s self,
And Priam’s offspring, bring disastrous fate?
Do as thou wilt! yet not with our consent.”

To whom, in wrath, the Cloud-compeller thus:
“Revengeful! how have Priam and his sons
So deeply injur’d thee, that thus thou seek’st
With unabated anger to pursue,
Till thou o’erthrow, the strong-built walls of Troy?
Couldst thou but force the gates, and entering in
On Priam’s mangled flesh, and Priam’s sons,
And Trojans all, a bloody banquet make.
Perchance thy fury might at length be stayed.
But have thy will, lest this in future times
’Twixt me and thee be cause of strife renew’d.
Yet hear my words, and ponder what I say:
If e’er, in times to come, my will should be
Some city to destroy, inhabited
By men beloved of thee, seek not to turn
My wrath aside, but yield, as I do now,
Consenting, but with heart that ill consents;
For of all cities fair, beneath the sun
And starry Heaven, the abode of mortal men,
None to my soul was dear as sacred Troy,
And Priam’s self, and Priam’s warrior race.
For with drink-off’rings due, and fat of lambs,
My altar still hath at their hands been fed;
Such honour hath to us been ever paid.”

To whom the stag-ey’d Juno thus replied:
“Three cities are there, dearest to my heart;
Argos, and Sparta, and the ample streets
Of rich Mycenæ; work on them thy will;
Destroy them, if thine anger they incur;
I will not interpose, nor hinder thee;
Mourn them I shall; reluctant see their fall,
But not resist; for sovereign is thy will.
Yet should my labours not be fruitless all;
For I too am a God; my blood is thine;
Worthy of honour, as the eldest born
Of deep-designing Saturn, and thy wife;
Thine, who o’er all th’ Immortals reign’st supreme.
But yield we each to other, I to thee,
And thou to me; the other Gods will all
By us be rul’d. On Pallas then enjoin
That to the battle-field of Greece and Troy
She haste, and so contrive that Trojans first
May break the treaty, and the Greeks assail.”

She said: the Sire of Gods and men complied,
And thus with winged words to Pallas spoke:
“Go to the battle-field of Greece and Troy
In haste, and so contrive that Trojans first
May break the treaty, and the Greeks assail.”

His words fresh impulse gave to Pallas’ zeal,
And from Olympus’ heights in haste she sped;
Like to a meteor, that, of grave portent
To warring armies or sea-faring men,
The son of deep-designing Saturn sends,
Bright-flashing, scatt’ring fiery sparks around,
The blue-ey’d Goddess darted down to earth,
And lighted in the midst; amazement held
The Trojan warriors and the well-greav’d Greeks;
And one to other look’d and said, “What means
This sign? Must fearful battle rage again,
Or may we hope for gentle peace from Jove,
Who to mankind dispenses peace and war?”
Such was the converse Greeks and Trojans held.
Pallas meanwhile, amid the Trojan host,
Clad in the likeness of Antenor’s son,
Laodocus, a spearman stout and brave,
Search’d here and there, if haply she might find
The godlike Pandarus; Lycaon’s son
She found, of noble birth and stalwart form,
Standing, encircled by his sturdy band
Of bucklered followers from Æsepus’ stream,
She stood beside him, and address’d him thus:

“Wilt thou by me be ruled, Lycaon’s son?
For durst thou but at Menelaus shoot
Thy winged arrow, great would be thy fame,
And great thy favour with the men of Troy,
And most of all with Paris; at his hand
Thou shalt receive rich guerdon, when he hears
That warlike Menelaus, by thy shaft
Subdued, is laid upon the fun’ral pyre.
Bend then thy bow at Atreus’ glorious son,
Vowing to Phoebus, Lycia’s guardian God,
The Archer-King, to pay of firstling lambs
An ample hecatomb, when home return’d
In safety to Zeleia’s sacred town.”
Thus she; and, fool, he listen’d to her words.
Straight he uncas’d his polish’d bow, his spoil
Won from a mountain ibex, which himself,
In ambush lurking, through the breast had shot,
True to his aim, as from behind a crag
He came in sight; prone on the rock he fell;
With horns of sixteen palms his head was crown’d;
These deftly wrought a skilful workman’s hand,
And polish’d smooth, and tipp’d the ends with gold.
He bent, and resting on the ground his bow,
Strung it anew; his faithful comrades held
Their shields before him, lest the sons of Greece
Should make their onset ere his shaft could reach
The warlike Menelaus, Atreus’ son.
His quiver then withdrawing from its case,
With care a shaft he chose, ne’er shot before,
Well-feather’d, messenger of pangs and death;
The stinging arrow fitted to the string,
And vow’d to Phoebus, Lycia’s guardian God,
The Archer-King, to pay of firstling lambs
An ample hecatomb, when home return’d
In safety to Zeleia’s sacred town.
At once the sinew and the notch he drew;
The sinew to his breast, and to the bow
The iron head; then, when the mighty bow
Was to a circle strain’d, sharp rang the horn,
And loud the sinew twang’d, as tow’rd the crowd
With deadly speed the eager arrow sprang.

Nor, Menelaus, was thy safety then
Uncar’d for of the Gods; Jove’s daughter first,
Pallas, before thee stood, and turn’d aside
The pointed arrow; turn’d it so aside
As when a mother from her infant’s cheek,
Wrapt in sweet slumbers, brushes off a fly;
Its course she so directed that it struck
Just where the golden clasps the belt restrain’d,
And where the breastplate, doubled, check’d its force.
On the close-fitting belt the arrow struck;
Right through the belt of curious workmanship
It drove, and through the breastplate richly wrought,
And through the coat of mail he wore beneath,
His inmost guard and best defence to check
The hostile weapons’ force; yet onward still
The arrow drove, and graz’d the hero’s flesh.
Forth issued from the wound the crimson blood.
As when some Carian or Maeonian maid,
With crimson dye the ivory stains, designed
To be the cheek-piece of a warrior’s steed,
By many a valiant horseman coveted,
As in the house it lies, a monarch’s boast,
The horse adorning, and the horseman’s pride:
So, Menelaus, then thy graceful thighs,
And knees, and ancles, with thy blood were dy’d.

Great Agamemnon shudder’d as he saw
The crimson drops out-welling from the wound;
Shudder’d the warlike Menelaus’ self;
But when not buried in his flesh he saw
The barb and sinew, back his spirit came.

Then deeply groaning, Agamemnon spoke,
As Menelaus by the hand he held,
And with him groan’d his comrades: “Brother dear,
I wrought thy death when late, on compact sworn,
I sent thee forth alone for Greece to fight;
Wounded by Trojans, who their plighted faith
Have trodden under foot; but not in vain
Are solemn cov’nants and the blood of lambs,
The treaty wine outpoured, and hand-plight given,
Wherein men place their trust; if not at once,
Yet soon or late will Jove assert their claim;
And heavy penalties the perjured pay
With their own blood, their children’s, and their wives’.
So in my inmost soul full well I know
The day shall come when this imperial Troy,
And Priam’s race, and Priam’s royal self,
Shall in one common ruin be o’erthrown;
And Saturn’s son himself, high-throned Jove,
Who dwells in Heav’n, shall in their faces flash
His aegis dark and dread, this treach’rous deed
Avenging; this shall surely come to pass.
But, Menelaus, deep will be my grief,
If thou shouldst perish, meeting thus thy fate.
To thirsty Argos should I then return
By foul disgrace o’erwhelm’d; for, with thy fall,
The Greeks will mind them of their native land;
And as a trophy to the sons of Troy
The Argive Helen leave; thy bones meanwhile
Shall moulder here beneath a foreign soil.
Thy work undone; and with insulting scorn
Some vaunting Trojan, leaping on the tomb
Of noble Menelaus, thus shall say:
‘On all his foes may Agamemnon so
His wrath accomplish, who hath hither led
Of Greeks a mighty army, all in vain;
And bootless home with empty ships hath gone,
And valiant Menelaus left behind;’
Thus when men speak, gape, earth, and hide my shame.”

To whom the fair-hair’d Menelaus thus
With, cheering words: “Fear not thyself, nor cause
The troops to fear: the arrow hath not touch’d
A vital part: the sparkling belt hath first
Turn’d it aside, the doublet next beneath,
And coat of mail, the work of arm’rer’s hands.”

To whom the monarch Agamemnon thus:
“Dear Menelaus, may thy words be true!
The leech shall tend thy wound, and spread it o’er
With healing ointments to assuage the pain.”

He said, and to the sacred herald call’d:
“Haste thee, Talthybius! summon with all speed
The son of Æsculapius, peerless leech,
Machaon; bid him hither haste to see
The warlike Menelaus, chief of Greeks,
Who by an arrow from some practis’d hand,
Trojan or Lycian, hath receiv’d a wound;
A cause of boast to them, to us of grief.”

He said, nor did the herald not obey,
But through the brass-clad ranks of Greece he pass’d,
In search of brave Machaon; him he found
Standing, by buckler’d warriors bold begirt,
Who follow’d him from Trica’s grassy plains.
He stood beside him, and address’d him thus:
“Up, son of Æsculapius! Atreus’ son,
The mighty monarch, summons thee to see
The warlike Menelaus, chief of Greeks,
Who by an arrow from some practis’d hand,
Trojan or Lycian, hath receiv’d a wound;
A cause of boast to them, to us of grief.”

Thus he; and not unmov’d Machaon heard:
They thro’ the crowd, and thro’ the wide-spread host,
Together took their way; but when they came
Where fair-hair’d Menelaus, wounded, stood,
Around him in a ring the best of Greece,
And in the midst the godlike chief himself,
From the close-fitting belt the shaft he drew,
Breaking the pointed barbs; the sparkling belt
He loosen’d, and the doublet underneath,
And coat of mail, the work of arm’rer’s hand.
But when the wound appear’d in sight, where struck
The stinging arrow, from the clotted blood
He cleans’d it, and applied with skilful hand
The herbs of healing power, which Chiron erst
In friendly guise upon his sire bestowed.

While round the valiant Menelaus they
Were thus engag’d, advanc’d the Trojan hosts:
They donn’d their arms, and for the fight prepar’d.
In Agamemnon then no trace was seen
Of laggard sloth, no shrinking from the fight,
But full of ardour to the field he rush’d.
He left his horses and brass-mounted car
(The champing horses by Eurymedon,
The son of Ptolemy, Peiraeus’ son,
Were held aloof), but with repeated charge
Still to be near at hand, when faint with toil
His limbs should fail him marshalling his host.
Himself on foot the warrior ranks array’d;
With cheering words addressing whom he found
With zeal preparing for the battle-field:
“Relax not, valiant friends, your warlike toil;
For Jove to falsehood ne’er will give his aid;
And they who first, regardless of their oaths,
Have broken truce, shall with their flesh themselves
The vultures feed, while we, their city raz’d,
Their wives and helpless children bear away.”

But whom remiss and shrinking from the war
He found, with keen rebuke he thus assail’d;
“Ye wretched Greeks, your country’s foul reproach,
Have ye no sense of shame? Why stand ye thus
Like timid fawns, that in the chase run down,
Stand all bewildered, spiritless and tame?
So stand ye now, nor dare to face the fight.
What! will ye wait the Trojans’ near approach,
Where on the beach, beside the hoary deep,
Our goodly ships are drawn, and see if Jove
Will o’er you his protecting hand extend?”

As thus the King the serried ranks review’d,
He came where thronging round their skilful chief
Idomeneus, the warlike bands of Crete
Were arming for the fight; Idomeneus,
Of courage stubborn as the forest boar,
The foremost ranks array’d; Meriones
The rearmost squadrons had in charge; with joy
The monarch Agamemnon saw, and thus
With accents bland Idomeneus address’d:

“Idomeneus, above all other Greeks,
In battle and elsewhere, I honour thee;
And in the banquet, where the noblest mix
The ruddy wine for chiefs alone reserved,
Though others drink their share, yet by thy side
Thy cup, like mine, still new replenished stands
To drink at pleasure. Up then to the fight,
And show thyself the warrior that thou art.”

To whom the Cretan King, Idomeneus:
“In me, Atrides, thou shalt ever find,
As at the first I promis’d, comrade true;
But go, and stir the other long-haired Greeks
To speedy battle; since the Trojans now
The truce have broken; and defeat and death
Must wait on those who have their oaths forsworn.”

He said, and Agamemnon went his way
Rejoicing; through the crowd he pass’d, and came
Where stood th’ Ajaces; them, in act to arm,
Amid a cloud of infantry he found;
And as a goat-herd from his watch-tow’r crag
Beholds a cloud advancing o’er the sea,
By Zephyr’s breath impell’d; as from afar
He gazes, black as pitch, it sweeps along
O’er the dark ocean’s face, and with it brings
A hurricane of rain; he, shudd’ring, sees,
And drives his flock beneath the shelt’ring cave:
So thick and dark, about th’ Ajaces stirr’d,
Impatient for the war, the stalwart youths,
Black masses, bristling close with spear and shield.

Well pleas’d, the monarch Agamemnon saw,
And thus address’d them: “Valiant chiefs, to you,
The leaders of the brass-clad Greeks, I give
(’Twere needless and unseemly) no commands;
For well ye understand your troops to rouse
To deeds of dauntless courage; would to Jove,
To Pallas and Apollo, that such mind
As is in you, in all the camp were found;
Then soon should Priam’s lofty city fall,
Tak’n and destroy’d by our victorious hands.”

Thus saying, them he left, and onward mov’d.
Nestor, the smooth-tongu’d Pylian chief, he found
The troops arraying, and to valiant deeds
His friends encouraging; stout Pelagon,
Alastor, Chromius, Haemon, warlike Prince,
And Bias bold, his people’s sure defence.
In the front rank, with chariot and with horse,
He plac’d the car-borne warriors; in the rear,
Num’rous and brave, a cloud of infantry,
Compactly mass’d, to stem the tide of war,
Between the two he plac’d th’ inferior troops,
That e’en against their will they needs must fight.
The horsemen first he charg’d, and bade them keep
Their horses well in hand, nor wildly rush
Amid the tumult: “See,” he said, “that none,
In skill or valour over-confident,
Advance before his comrades, nor alone
Retire; for so your lines were easier forc’d;
But ranging each beside a hostile car,
Thrust with your spears; for such the better way;
By men so disciplin’d, in elder days
Were lofty walls and fenced towns destroy’d.”

Thus he, experienc’d in the wars of old;
Well pleas’d, the monarch Agamemnon saw,
And thus address’d him; “Would to Heav’n, old man,
That, as thy spirit, such too were thy strength
And vigour of thy limbs; but now old age,
The common lot of mortals, weighs thee down;
Would I could see some others in thy place,
And thou couldst still be numbered with the young!”

To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied:
“Atrides, I too fain would see restor’d
The strength I once possess’d, what time I slew
The godlike Ereuthalion; but the Gods
On man bestow not all their gifts at once;
I then was young, and now am bow’d with age,
Yet with the chariots can I still go forth,
And aid with sage advice: for such the right
And privilege of age; to hurl the spear
Belongs to younger men, who after me
Were born, who boast their vigour unimpair’d.”

He said; and Agamemnon went his way,
Rejoicing: to Menestheus next he came,
The son of Peteus, charioteer renown’d;
Him found he, circled by th’ Athenian bands,
The raisers of the war-cry; close beside
The sage Ulysses stood, around him rang’d,
Not unrenown’d, the Cephalonian troops:
The sound of battle had not reach’d their ears;
For but of late the Greek and Trojan hosts
Were set in motion; they expecting stood,
Till other Grecian columns should advance,
Assail the Trojans, and renew the war.

Atrides saw, and thus, reproachful, spoke:
“O son of Peteus, Heav’n-descended King!
And thou too, master of all tricky arts,
Why, ling’ring, stand ye thus aloof, and wait
For others coming? ye should be the first
The hot assault of battle to confront;
For ye are first my summons to receive,
Whene’er the honour’d banquet we prepare:
And well ye like to eat the sav’ry meat,
And, at your will, the luscious wine-cups drain:
Now stand ye here, and unconcern’d would see
Ten columns pass before you to the fight.”

To whom, with stern regard, Ulysses thus:
“What words have pass’d the barrier of thy lips,
Atrides? how with want of warlike zeal
Canst thou reproach us? when the Greeks again
The furious war shall waken, thou shalt see
(If that thou care to see) amid the ranks
Of Troy, the father of Telemachus
In the fore-front: thy words are empty wind.”

Atrides saw him chafed, and smiling, thus
Recalled his former words: “Ulysses sage,
Laertes’ high-born son, not over-much
I give thee blame, or orders; for I know
Thy mind to gentle counsels is inclin’d;
Thy thoughts are one with mine; then come, henceforth
Shall all be well; and if a hasty word
Have pass’d, may Heaven regard it as unsaid.”

Thus saying, them he left, and onward mov’d.
The son of Tydeus, valiant Diomed,
Standing he found amid his warlike steeds
And well-built cars; beside him, Sthenelus,
The son of Capaneus; Atrides saw,
And thus address’d him with reproachful words:
“Alas! thou son of Tydeus, wise and bold,
Why crouch with fear? why thus appall’d survey
The pass of war? not so had Tydeus crouch’d;
His hand was ever ready from their foes
To guard his comrades; so, at least, they say
Whose eyes beheld his labours; I myself
Nor met him e’er, nor saw; but, by report,
Thy father was the foremost man of men.
A stranger to Mycenæ once he came,
With godlike Polynices; not at war,
But seeking succour for the troops that lay
Encamp’d before the sacred walls of Thebes;
For reinforcements earnestly they sued;
The boon they ask’d was granted them, but Jove
With unpropitious omens turn’d them back.
Advancing on their journey, when they reach’d
Asopus’ grassy banks and rushes deep,
The Greeks upon a mission Tydeus sent:
He went; and many Thebans there he found
Feasting in Eteocles’ royal hall:
Amid them all, a stranger and alone,
He stood unterrified, and challeng’d all
To wrestle with him, and with ease o’erthrew:
So mighty was the aid that Pallas gave.
Whereat indignant, they, on his return,
An ambush set, of fifty chosen youths;
Two were their leaders; Haemon’s godlike son,
Maeon, and Lycophontes, warrior brave,
Son of Autophonus; and these too far’d
But ill at Tydeus’ hand; he slew them all:
Maeon alone, obedient to the Gods,
He spar’d, and bade him bear the tidings home.
Such Tydeus was: though greater in debate,
His son will never rival him in arms.”

He said: brave Diomed in silence heard,
Submissive to the monarch’s stern rebuke;
Then answer’d thus the son of Capaneus:
“Atrides, speak not falsely: well thou know’st
The truth, that we our fathers far surpass.
The seven-gated city, Thebes, we took,
With smaller force beneath the wall of Mars,
Trusting to heav’nly signs, and fav’ring Jove,
Where they by blind, presumptuous folly fail’d;
Then equal not our fathers’ deeds with ours.”

To whom thus Diomed, with stern regard:
“Father, be silent; hearken to my words:
I blame not Agamemnon, King of men,
Who thus to battle stirs the well-greav’d Greeks:
His will the glory be if we o’ercome
The valiant Trojans, and their city take;
Great too his loss if they o’er us prevail:
Then come, let us too for the fight prepare.”

He said; and from the car leap’d down in arms:
Fierce rang the armour on the warrior’s breast,
That ev’n the stoutest heart might quail with fear.

As by the west wind driv’n, the ocean waves
Dash forward on the far-resounding shore,
Wave upon wave; first curls the ruffled sea
With whit’ning crests; anon with thund’ring roar
It breaks upon the beach, and from the crags
Recoiling flings in giant curves its head
Aloft, and tosses high the wild sea-spray:
Column on column, so the hosts of Greece
Pour’d, ceaseless, to the war; to each the chiefs
Their orders gave; the rest in silence mov’d:
Nor would ye deem that mighty mass endued
With power of speech, so silently they moved
In awe of their great captains: far around
Flashed the bright armour they were girt withal.

On th’ other hand, the Trojans, as the flocks
That in the court-yard of some wealthy Lord
In countless numbers stand, at milking-time,
Incessant bleating, as their lambs they hear;
So rose their mingled clamours through the camp;
For not one language nor one speech was there,
But many nations call’d from distant lands:
These Mars inspir’d, and those the blue-ey’d Maid;
And Fear, and Flight, and Discord unappeas’d,
Of blood-stain’d Mars the sister and the friend:
“With humble crest at first, anon her head,
“While yet she treads the earth, affronts the skies.
The gage of battle in the midst she threw,
Strode through the crowd, and woe to mortals wrought.
When to the midst they came, together rush’d
Bucklers and lances, and the furious might
Of mail-clad warriors; bossy shield on shield
Clatter’d in conflict; loud the clamour rose.
Then rose too mingled shouts and groans of men
Slaying and slain; the earth ran red with blood.
As when, descending from the mountain’s brow,
Two wintry torrents, from their copious source
Pour downward to the narrow pass, where meet
Their mingled waters in some deep ravine,
Their weight of flood; on the far mountain’s side
The shepherd hears the roar; so loud arose
The shouts and yells of those commingling hosts.

First ’mid the foremost ranks Antilochus
A Trojan warrior, Echepolus, slew,
A crested chief, Thalesius’ noble son.
Beneath his horsehair-plumed helmet’s peak
The sharp spear struck; deep in his forehead fix’d
It pierc’d the bone; then darkness veil’d his eyes,
And, like a tow’r, amid the press he fell.
Him Elephenor, brave Abantian chief,
Son of Chalcodon, seizing by the feet,
Dragg’d from beneath the darts, in haste to strip
His armour off; but short-liv’d was th’ attempt;
For bold Agenor mark’d him as he drew
The corpse aside, and with his brass-tipp’d spear
Thrust through his flank, unguarded, as he stoop’d,
Beside his shield; and slack’d his limbs in death.
The spirit was fled; but hotly o’er him rag’d
The war of Greeks and Trojans; fierce as wolves
They fought, man struggling hand to hand with man.

Then Ajax Telamon a stalwart youth,
Son of Anthemion, Simoisius, slew;
Whose mother gave him birth on Simois’ banks,
When with her parents down from Ida’s heights
She drove her flock; thence Simoisius nam’d:
Not destined he his parents to repay
Their early care; for short his term of life,
By godlike Ajax’ mighty spear subdued.
Him, to the front advancing, in the breast,
By the right nipple, Ajax struck; right through,
From front to back, the brass-tipp’d spear was driv’n,
Out through the shoulder; prone in dust he fell;
As some tall poplar, grown in marshy mead,
Smooth-stemm’d, with branches tapering tow’rd the head;
Which with the biting axe the wheelwright fells,
To bend the felloes of his well-built car;
Sapless, beside the river, lies the tree;
So lay the youthful Simoisius, felled
By godlike Ajax’ hand. At him, in turn,
The son of Priam, Antiphus, encas’d
In radiant armour, from amid the crowd
His jav’lin threw; his mark, indeed, he miss’d;
But through the groin Ulysses’ faithful friend,
Leucus, he struck, in act to bear away
The youthful dead; down on the corpse he fell,
And, dying, of the dead relax’d his grasp.
Fierce anger, at his comrade’s slaughter, filled
Ulysses’ breast; in burnished armour clad
Forward he rush’d; and standing near, around
He look’d, and pois’d on high his glitt’ring lance:
Beneath his aim the Trojans back recoil’d;
Nor vainly flew the spear; Democoon,
A bastard son of Priam, met the blow:
He from Abydos came, his high-bred mares
There left to pasture; him Ulysses, fill’d
With fury at his lov’d companion’s death,
Smote on the head; through either temple pass’d
The pointed spear, and darkness veil’d his eyes.
Thund’ring he fell, and loud his armour rang.
At this the Trojan chiefs, and Hector’s self,
’Gan to give ground: the Greeks with joyful shouts
Seiz’d on the dead, and forward urg’d their course.
From Ilium’s heights Apollo, filled with wrath,
Look’d down, and to the Trojans shouted loud:
“Uprouse ye, valiant Trojans! give not way
Before the Greeks; their bodies are not stone,
Nor iron, to defy your trenchant swords;
And great Achilles, fair-hair’d Thetis’ son,
Fights not, but o’er his anger broods apart.”
So from the city call’d the heav’nly voice;
The Greeks, meanwhile, all-glorious Pallas fir’d,
Mov’d ’mid the tumult, and the laggards rous’d.

Then fell Diores, Amarynceus’ son:
A rugged fragment of a rock had crush’d
His ancle and right leg; from Ænon came
The Thracian chief who hurl’d it, Peirous, son
Of Imbrasus; the tendons both, and bones,
The huge mass shatter’d; backward in the dust
He fell, both hands extending to his friends,
Gasping his life away; then quick up-ran
He who the blow had dealt, and with his spear
Thrust through him, by the navel; from the wound
His bowels gush’d, and darkness veil’d his eyes.

But he, advancing, through the breast was struck
Above the nipple, by th’ Ætolian chief.
Thoas; and through his lungs the spear was driv’n.
Thoas approach’d, and from his breast withdrew
The sturdy spear, and with his sharp-edg’d sword
Across his waistband gave the mortal stroke:
Yet could not touch his arms; for all around
The Thracian warriors, with, their tufted crowns,
Their long spears held before them, him, though stout,
And strong, and valiant, kept at bay; perforce
He yielded; and thus side by side were laid
The two, the Thracian and th’ Epeian chief;
And round them many a valiant soldier lay.

Well might the deeds achieved that day deserve
His praise, who through that bloody field might pass
By sword or spear unwounded, by the hand
Of Pallas guarded from the weapon’s flight;
For many a Trojan, many a Greek, that day
Prone in the dust, and side by side, were laid.





Such strength, and courage then to Diomed,
The son of Tydeus, Pallas gave, as rais’d,
’Mid all the Greeks, the glory of his name.
Forth from his helm and shield a fiery light
There flash’d, like autumn’s star, that brightest shines
When newly risen from his ocean bath.
So from the warrior’s head and shoulders flash’d
That fiery light, as to the midst he urg’d
His furious course, where densest masses fought.

There was one Dares ’mid the Trojan host,
The priest of Vulcan, rich, of blameless life;
Two gallant sons he had, Idaeus nam’d,
And Phegeus, skill’d in all the points of war.
These, parted from the throng, the warrior met;
They on their car, while he on foot advanc’d.
When near they came, first Phegeus threw his spear;
O’er the left shoulder of Tydides pass’d
The erring weapon’s point, and miss’d its mark.
His pond’rous spear in turn Tydides threw,
And not in vain; on Phegeus’ breast it struck,
Full in the midst, and hurl’d him from the car.
Idaeus from the well-wrought chariot sprang,
And fled, nor durst his brother’s corpse defend.
Nor had he so escap’d the doom of death,
But Vulcan bore him safely from the field,
In darkness shrouded, that his aged sire
Might not be wholly of his sons bereav’d.
The car Tydides to his comrades gave,
And bade them to the ships the horses drive.

Now when the Trojans Dares’ sons beheld,
The one in flight, the other stretch’d in death,
Their spirits within them quail’d; but Pallas took
The hand of Mars, and thus address’d the God:
“Mars, Mars, thou bane of mortals, blood-stain’d Lord,
Razer of cities, wherefore leave we not
The Greeks and Trojans to contend, and see
To which the sire of all will vict’ry give;
While we retire, and shun the wrath of Jove?”

Thus saying, from the battle Mars she led,
And plac’d him on Scamander’s steepy banks.

The Greeks drove back the Trojan host; the chiefs
Slew each his victim; Agamemnon first,
The mighty monarch, from his chariot hurl’d
Hodius, the sturdy Halizonian chief,
Him, as he turn’d, between the shoulder-blades
The jav’lin struck, and through his chest was driv’n;
Thund’ring he fell, and loud his armour rang.

On Phaestus, Borus’ son, Maeonian chief,
Who from the fertile plains of Tarna came,
Then sprang Idomeneus; and as he sought
To mount upon his car, the Cretan King
Through his right shoulder drove the pointed spear;
He fell; the shades of death his eyes o’erspread,
And of his arms the followers stripp’d his corpse.

The son of Atreus, Menelaus, slew
Scamandrius, son of Strophius, sportsman keen,
In woodcraft skilful; for his practis’d hand
Had by Diana’s self been taught to slay
Each beast of chase the mountain forest holds.
But nought avail’d him then the Archer-Queen
Diana’s counsels, nor his boasted art
Of distant aim; for as he fled, the lance
Of Menelaus, Atreus’ warlike son,
Behind his neck, between the shoulder-blades,
His flight arresting, through his chest was driv’n.
Headlong he fell, and loud his armour rang.

Phereclus by Meriones was slain,
Son of Harmonides, whose practis’d hand
Knew well to fashion many a work of art;
By Pallas highly favour’d; he the ships
For Paris built, first origin of ill,
Freighted with evil to the men of Troy,
And to himself, who knew not Heav’n’s decrees.
Him, in his headlong flight, in hot pursuit
Meriones o’ertook, and thrust his lance
Through his right flank; beneath the bone was driv’n
The spear, and pierc’d him through: prone on his knees,
Groaning, he fell, and death his eyelids clos’d.

Meges Pedaeus slew, Antenor’s son,
A bastard born, but by Theano rear’d
With tender care, and nurtur’d as her son,
With her own children, for her husband’s sake.
Him, Phyleus’ warrior son, approaching near,
Thrust through the junction of the head and neck;
Crash’d through his teeth the spear beneath the tongue;
Prone in the dust he gnash’d the brazen point.

Eurypylus, Euaemon’s noble son,
Hypsenor slew, the worthy progeny
Of Dolopion brave; Scamander’s priest,
And by the people as a God rever’d:
Him, as he fled before him, from behind
Eurypylus, Euaemon’s noble son,
Smote with the sword; and from the shoulder-point
The brawny arm he sever’d; to the ground
Down fell the gory hand; the darkling shades
Of death, and rig’rous doom, his eyelids clos’d.

Thus labour’d they amid the stubborn fight;
But of Tydides none might say to whom
His arm belong’d, or whether with the hosts
Of Troy or Greece he mingled in the fight:
Hither and thither o’er the plain he rush’d,
Like to a wintry stream, that brimming o’er
Breaks down its barriers in its rapid course;
Nor well-built bridge can stem the flood, nor fence
guards the fertile fields, as down it pours
Its sudden torrent, swoll’n with rain from Heav’n,
And many a goodly work of man destroys:
So back were borne before Tydides’ might
The serried ranks of Troy, nor dar’d await,
Despite their numbers, his impetuous charge.

Him when Lycaon’s noble son beheld
Careering o’er the plain, the serried ranks
Driving before him, quick at Tydeus’ son
He bent his bow; and onward as he rush’d,
On the right shoulder, near the breastplate’s joint,
The stinging arrow struck; right through it pass’d,
And held its way, that blood the breastplate stain’d.
Then shouted loud Lycaon’s noble son:
“Arouse ye, valiant Trojans, ye who goad
Your flying steeds; the bravest of the Greeks
Is wounded, nor, I deem, can long withstand
My weapon, if indeed from Lycia’s shore
By Phoebus’ counsel sent I join’d the war.”

Thus he, vain-glorious; but not so was quell’d
The godlike chief; back he withdrew, and stood
Beside his car, and thus to Sthenelus,
The son of Capaneus, his speech address’d:
“Up, gentle son of Capaneus, descend
From off the car, and from my shoulder draw
This stinging arrow forth.” He said, and down
Leap’d from the chariot Sthenelus, and stood
Beside him; and as forth he drew the shaft,
Gush’d out the blood, and dyed the twisted mail.
Then thus the valiant son of Tydeus pray’d:
“Hear me, thou child of aegis-bearing Jove,
Unconquer’d! if amid the deadly fight
Thy friendly aid my father e’er sustain’d,
Let me in turn thy favour find; and grant
Within my reach and compass of my spear
That man may find himself, who unawares
Hath wounded me, and vainly boasting deems
I shall not long behold the light of day.”
Thus pray’d the chief, and Pallas heard his pray’r;
To all his limbs, to feet and hands alike,
She gave fresh vigour; and with winged words,
Beside him as she stood, address’d him thus:

“Go fearless onward, Diomed, to meet
The Trojan hosts; for I within thy breast
Thy father’s dauntless courage have infus’d,
Such as of old in Tydeus’ bosom dwelt,
Bold horseman, buckler-clad; and from thine eyes
The film that dimm’d them I have purg’d away,
That thou mayst well ’twixt Gods and men discern.
If then some God make trial of thy force,
With other of th’ Immortals fight thou not;
But should Jove’s daughter Venus dare the fray
Thou needst not shun at her to cast thy spear.”

This said, the blue-ey’d Goddess disappear’d.
Forthwith again amid the foremost ranks
Tydides mingled; keenly as before
His spirit against the Trojans burn’d to fight,
With threefold fury now he sought the fray.
As when a hungry lion has o’erleap’d
The sheepfold; him the guardian of the flock
Has wounded, not disabled; by his wound
To rage excited, but not forc’d to fly,
The fold he enters, scares the trembling sheep,
That, closely huddled, each on other press,
Then pounces on his prey, and leaps the fence:
So pounc’d Tydides on the Trojan host.
Astynous and Hypeiron then he slew,
His people’s guardian; through the breast of one
He drove his spear, and with his mighty sword
He smote the other on the collar-bone,
The shoulder sev’ring from the neck and back.
Them left he there to lie; of Abas then
And Polyeidus went in hot pursuit,
Sons of Eurydamas, an aged seer,
Whose visions stay’d them not; but both were doom’d
A prey to valiant Diomed to fall.
Xanthus and Thoon then the hero slew,
The sons of Phaenops, children of his age:
He, worn with years, no other sons begot,
Heirs of his wealth; they two together fell,
And to their father left a load of grief,
That from the battle they return’d not home,
And distant kindred all his substance shar’d.
On Chromius and Echemon next he fell,
Two sons of Priam on one chariot borne;
And as a lion springs upon a herd,
And breaks the neck of heifer or of steer,
Feeding in woodland glade; with such a spring
These two, in vain resisting, from their car
Tydides hurl’d; then stripp’d their arms, and bade
His followers lead their horses to the ships.

Him when Æneas saw amid the ranks
Dealing destruction, through the fight and throng
Of spears he plung’d, if haply he might find
The godlike Pandarus; Lycaon’s son
He found, of noble birth and stalwart form,
And stood before him, and address’d him thus:
“Where, Pandarus, are now thy winged shafts,
Thy bow, and well-known skill, wherein with thee
Can no man here contend? nor Lycia boasts,
Through all her wide-spread plains, a truer aim;
Then raise to Jove thy hands, and with thy shaft
Strike down this chief, whoe’er he be, that thus
Is making fearful havoc in our host,
Relaxing many a warrior’s limbs in death:
If he be not indeed a God, incens’d
Against the Trojans for neglected rites;
For fearful is the vengeance of a God.”

Whom answer’d thus Lycaon’s noble son:
“Æneas, chief and councillor of Troy,
Most like in all respects to Tydeus’ son
He seems; his shield I know, and visor’d helm,
And horses; whether he himself be God,
I cannot tell; but if he be indeed
The man I think him, Tydeus’ valiant son,
He fights not thus without the aid of Heav’n;
But by his side, his shoulders veiled in cloud,
Some God attends his steps, and turns away
The shaft that just hath reach’d him; for ev’n now
A shaft I shot, which by the breastplate’s joint
Pierc’d his right shoulder through: full sure I deem’d
That shaft had sent him to the shades, and yet
It slew him not; ’tis sure some angry God.
Nor horse have I, nor car on which to mount;
But in my sire Lycaon’s wealthy house
Elev’n fair chariots stand, all newly built,
Each with its cover; by the side of each
Two steeds on rye and barley white are fed;
And in his well-built house, when here I came,
Lycaon, aged warrior, urg’d me oft
With horses and with chariots high upborne,
To lead the Trojans in the stubborn fight;
I hearken’d not—’twere better if I had—
Yet fear’d I lest my horses, wont to feed
In plenty unstinted, by the soldiers’ wants
Might of their custom’d forage be depriv’d;
I left them there, and hither came on foot,
And trusting to my bow: vain trust, it seems;
Two chiefs already have I struck, the sons
Of Tydeus and of Atreus; with true aim
Drawn blood from both, yet but increas’d their rage.
Sad was the hour when down from where it hung
I took my bow, and hasting to the aid
Of godlike Hector, hither led my troops;
But should I e’er return, and see again
My native land, my wife, my lofty hall,
Then may a stranger’s sword cut off my head,
If with these hands I shatter not, and burn,
The bow that thus hath fail’d me at my need.”

Him answer’d thus Æneas, chief of Troy:
“Speak thou not thus; our fortunes shall not change
Till thou and I, with chariot and with horse,
This chief encounter, and his prowess prove;
Then mount my car, and see how swift my steeds.
Hither and thither, in pursuit or flight,
From those of Tros descended, scour the plain.
So if the victory to Diomed,
The son of Tydeus, should by Jove be giv’n,
We yet may safely reach the walls of Troy.
Take thou the whip and reins, while I descend
To fight on foot; or thou the chief engage,
And leave to me the conduct of the car.”

Whom answer’d thus Lycaon’s noble son:
“Æneas, of thy horses and thy car
Take thou the charge; beneath th’ accustomed hand,
With more assurance would they draw the car,
If we from Tydeus’ son be forced to fly;
Nor, struck with panic, and thy voice unheard,
Refuse to bear us from the battle-field;
So should ourselves be slain, and Tydeus’ son
In triumph drive thy horses to the ships.
But thou thy horses and thy chariot guide,
While I his onset with my lance receive.”

Thus saying, on the car they mounted both,
And tow’rd Tydides urg’d their eager steeds.
Them Sthenelus beheld, the noble son
Of Capaneus, and to Tydides cried:
“Oh son of Tydeus, dearest to my soul,
Two men I see, of might invincible,
Impatient to engage thee; Pandarus,
Well skill’d in archery, Lycaon’s son;
With him, Æneas, great Anchises’ son,
Who from immortal Venus boasts his birth.
Then let us timely to the car retreat,
Lest, moving thus amid the foremost ranks,
Thy daring pay the forfeit of thy life.”

To whom brave Diomed with stern regard:
“Talk not to me of flight! I heed thee not!
It is not in my nature so to fight
With skulking artifice and faint retreat;
My strength is yet unbroken; I should shame
To mount the car; but forward will I go
To meet these chiefs’ encounter; for my soul
Pallas forbids the touch of fear to know.
Nor shall their horses’ speed procure for both
A safe return, though one escape my arm.
This too I say, and bear my words in mind;
By Pallas’ counsel if my hap should be
To slay them both, leave thou my horses here,
The reins attaching to the chariot-rail,
And seize, and from the Trojans to the ships
Drive off the horses in Æneas’ car;
From those descended, which all-seeing Jove
On Tros, for Ganymede his son, bestow’d:
With these may none beneath the sun compare.
Anchises, King of men, the breed obtain’d
By cunning, to the horses sending mares
Without the knowledge of Laomedon.
Six colts were thus engender’d: four of these
In his own stalls he rear’d; the other two
Gave to Æneas, fear-inspiring chief:
These could we win, our praise were great indeed.”

Such converse while they held, the twain approach’d,
Their horses urg’d to speed; then thus began,
To Diomed, Lycaon’s noble son:

“Great son of Tydeus, warrior brave and skill’d,
My shaft, it seems, has fail’d to reach thy life;
Try we then now what hap attends my spear.”
He said; and, poising, hurl’d his pond’rous spear,
And struck Tydides’ shield; right through the shield
Drove the keen weapon, and the breastplate reach’d.
Then shouted loud Lycaon’s noble son:
“Thou hast it through the flank, nor canst thou long
Survive the blow; great glory now is mine.”

To whom, unmov’d, the valiant Diomed:
“Thine aim hath failed, I am not touch’d; and now
I deem we part not hence till one of ye
Glut with his blood th’ insatiate Lord of War.”

He said: the spear, by Pallas guided, struck
Beside the nostril, underneath the eye;
Crash’d thro’ the teeth, and cutting thro’ the tongue
Beneath the angle of the jaw came forth:
Down from the car he fell; and loudly rang
His glitt’ring arms: aside the startled steeds
Sprang devious: from his limbs the spirit fled.
Down leap’d Æneas, spear and shield in hand,
Against the Greeks to guard the valiant dead;
And like a lion, fearless in his strength,
Around the corpse he stalk’d, this way and that,
His spear and buckler round before him held,
To all who dar’d approach him threat’ning death,
With fearful shouts; a rocky fragment then
Tydides lifted up, a mighty mass,
Which scarce two men could raise, as men are now:
But he, unaided, lifted it with ease.
With this he smote Æneas near the groin,
Where the thigh-bone, inserted in the hip,
Turns in the socket-joint; the rugged mass
The socket crush’d, and both the tendons broke,
And tore away the flesh: down on his knees,
Yet resting on his hand, the hero fell;
And o’er his eyes the shades of darkness spread.
Then had Æneas, King of men, been slain,
Had not his mother, Venus, child of Jove,
Who to Anchises, where he fed his flocks,
The hero bore, his peril quickly seen:
Around her son she threw her snowy arms,
And with a veil, thick-folded, wrapt him round,
From hostile spears to guard him, lest some Greek
Should pierce his breast, and rob him of his life.

She from the battle thus her son removed;
Nor did the son of Capaneus neglect
The strict injunction by Tydides giv’n;
His reins attaching to the chariot-rail,
Far from the battle-din he check’d, and left,
His own fleet steeds; then rushing forward, seiz’d,
And from the Trojans tow’rd the camp drove off,
The sleek-skinn’d horses of Æneas’ car.
These to Deipylus, his chosen friend,
He gave, of all his comrades best esteem’d,
Of soundest judgment, tow’rd the ships to drive.
Then, his own car remounting, seiz’d the reins,
And urg’d with eager haste his fiery steeds,
Seeking Tydides; he, meanwhile, press’d on
In keen pursuit of Venus; her he knew
A weak, unwarlike Goddess, not of those
That like Bellona fierce, or Pallas, range
Exulting through the blood-stain’d fields of war.

Her, searching thro’ the crowd, at length he found,
And springing forward, with his pointed spear
A wound inflicted on her tender hand.
Piercing th’ ambrosial veil, the Graces’ work,
The sharp spear graz’d her palm below the wrist.
Forth from the wound th’ immortal current flow’d,
Pure ichor, life-stream of the blessed Gods;
They eat no bread, they drink no ruddy wine,
And bloodless thence and deathless they become.
The Goddess shriek’d aloud, and dropp’d her son;
But in his arms Apollo bore him off
In a thick cloud envelop’d, lest some Greek
Might pierce his breast, and rob him of his life.
Loud shouted brave Tydides, as she fled:
“Daughter of Jove, from battle-fields retire;
Enough for thee weak woman to delude;
If war thou seek’st, the lesson thou shalt learn
Shall cause thee shudder but to hear it nam’d.”
Thus he; but ill at ease, and sorely pain’d,
The Goddess fled: her, Iris, swift as wind,
Caught up, and from the tumult bore away,
Weeping with pain, her fair skin soil’d with blood.

Mars on the left hand of the battle-field
She found, his spear reclining by his side,
And, veil’d in cloud, his car and flying steeds.
Kneeling, her brother she besought to lend
The flying steeds, with golden frontlets crown’d:
“Dear brother, aid me hence, and lend thy car
To bear me to Olympus, seat of Gods;
Great is the pain I suffer from a wound
Receiv’d from Diomed, a mortal man,
Who now would dare with Jove himself to fight.”

He lent the steeds, with golden frontlets crown’d;
In deep distress she mounted on the car:
Beside her Iris stood, and took the reins,
And urg’d the coursers; nothing loth they flew,
And soon to high Olympus, seat of Gods,
They came: swift Iris there the coursers stay’d,
Loos’d from the chariot, and before them plac’d
Ambrosial forage: on her mother’s lap,
Dione, Venus fell; she in her arms
Embrac’d, and sooth’d her with her hand, and said:
“Which of the heav’nly pow’rs hath wrong’d thee thus,
My child, as guilty of some open shame?”

Whom answer’d thus the laughter-loving Queen;
“The haughty son of Tydeus, Diomed,
Hath wounded me, because my dearest son,
Æneas, from the field I bore away.
No more ’twixt Greeks and Trojans is the fight,
But with the Gods themselves the Greeks contend.”
To whom Dione, heav’nly Goddess, thus:
“Have patience, dearest child; though much enforc’d,
Restrain thine anger: we, in Heav’n who dwell,
Have much to bear from mortals; and ourselves
Too oft upon each other suff’rings lay.
Mars had his suff’rings; by Aloeus’ sons,
Otus and Ephialtes, strongly bound,
He thirteen months in brazen fetters lay:
And there had pin’d away the God of War,
Insatiate Mars, had not their step-mother,
The beauteous Eriboea, sought the aid
Of Hermes; he by stealth releas’d the God,
Sore worn and wasted by his galling chains.
Juno too suffer’d, when Amphitryon’s son
Through her right breast a three-barb’d arrow sent:
Dire, and unheard of, were the pangs she bore.
Great Pluto’s self the stinging arrow felt,
When that same son of aegis-bearing Jove
Assail’d him in the very gates of hell,
And wrought him keenest anguish; pierc’d with pain
To high Olympus, to the courts of Jove,
Groaning, he came; the bitter shaft remain’d
Deep in his shoulder fix’d, and griev’d his soul.
But soon with soothing ointments Paeon’s hand
(For death on him was powerless) heal’d the wound.
Accurs’d was he, of daring over-bold,
Reckless of evil deeds, who with his bow
Assail’d the Gods, who on Olympus dwell.
The blue-ey’d Pallas, well I know, has urg’d
Tydides to assail thee; fool and blind!
Unknowing he how short his term of life
Who fights against the Gods! for him no child
Upon his knees shall lisp a father’s name,
Safe from the war and battle-field return’d.
Brave as he is, let Diomed beware
He meet not some more dangerous foe than thee.
Then fair Ægiale, Adrastus’ child,
The noble wife of valiant Diomed,
Shall long, with lamentations loud, disturb
The slumbers of her house, and vainly mourn
Her youthful Lord, the bravest of the Greeks.”
She said; and wip’d the ichor from the wound;
The hand was heal’d, the grievous pains allay’d.
But Juno and Minerva, looking on,
With words of bitter mock’ry Saturn’s son
Provok’d: and thus the blue-ey’d Goddess spoke:
“O Father! may I speak without offence?
Venus, it seems, has sought to lead astray
Some Grecian woman, and persuade to join
Those Trojans, whom she holds in high esteem;
And, as her hand the gentle dame caress’d,
A golden clasp has scratched her slender arm.”

Thus she: and smil’d the Sire of Gods and men;
He call’d the golden Venus to his side,
And, “Not to thee, my child,” he said, “belong
The deeds of war; do thou bestow thy care
On deeds of love, and tender marriage ties;
But leave to Mars and Pallas feats of arms.”

Such converse while they held, brave Diomed
Again assail’d Æneas; well he knew
Apollo’s guardian hand around him thrown;
Yet by the God undaunted, on he press’d
To slay Æneas, and his arms obtain.
Thrice was his onset made, with murd’rous aim;
And thrice Apollo struck his glitt’ring shield;
But when, with godlike force, he sought to make
His fourth attempt, the Far-destroyer spoke
In terms of awful menace: “Be advis’d,
Tydides, and retire; nor as a God
Esteem thyself; since not alike the race
Of Gods immortal and of earth-born men.”

He said; and Diomed a little space
Before the Far-destroyer’s wrath retir’d:
Apollo then Æneas bore away
Far from the tumult; and in Pergamus,
Where stood his sacred shrine, bestow’d him safe.
Latona there, and Dian, Archer-Queen,
In the great temple’s innermost recess,
Gave to his wounds their care, and sooth’d his pride.
Meanwhile Apollo of the silver bow
A phantom form prepar’d, the counterpart
Of great Æneas, and alike in arms:
Around the form, of Trojans and of Greeks,
Loud was the din of battle; fierce the strokes
That fell on rounded shield of tough bull’s-hide,
And lighter targe, before each warrior’s breast.
Then thus Apollo to the God of War:
“Mars! Mars! thou bane of mortals, blood-stain’d Lord,
Razer of cities, wer’t not well thyself
To interpose, and from the battle-field
Withdraw this chief, Tydides? such his pride,
He now would dare with Jove himself to fight.
Venus, of late, he wounded in the wrist;
And, like a God, but now confronted me.”
He said, and sat on Ilium’s topmost height:
While Mars, in likeness of the Thracian chief,
Swift Acamas, amid the Trojan ranks
Mov’d to and fro, and urg’d them to the fight.
To Priam’s Heav’n-descended sons he call’d;
“Ye sons of Priam, Heav’n-descended King,
How long will ye behold your people slain?
Till to your very doors the war be brought?
Æneas, noble-soul’d Anchises’ son,
In like esteem with Hector held, is down;
On to his aid! our gallant comrade save!”

He said; his words fresh courage gave to all:
Then thus Sarpedon, in reproachful tone,
Address’d the godlike Hector; “Where is now,
Hector, the spirit that heretofore was thine?
’Twas once thy boast that ev’n without allies
Thyself, thy brethren, and thy house, alone
The city could defend: for all of these
I look in vain, and see not one; they all,
As curs around a lion, cow’r and crouch:
We, strangers and allies, maintain the fight.
I to your aid, from lands afar remote,
From Lycia came, by Xanthus’ eddying stream;
There left a cherish’d wife, and infant son,
And rich possessions, which might envy move;
Yet I my troops encourage; and myself
Have play’d my part, though nought have I to lose,
Nought that the Greeks could drive or bear away;
But thou stand’st idly by; nor bidd’st the rest
Maintain their ground, and guard their wives and homes.
Beware lest ye, as in the meshes caught
Of some wide-sweeping net, become the prey
And booty of your foes, who soon shall lay
Your prosp’rous city level with the dust.
By day and night should this thy thoughts engage,
With constant pray’r to all thy brave allies,
Firmly to stand, and wipe this shame away.”

He said; and Hector felt the biting speech;
Down from his car he leap’d; and through the ranks,
Two jav’lins brandishing, he pass’d, to arms
Exciting all, and rais’d his battle-cry.
The tide was turn’d; again they fac’d the Greeks:
In serried ranks the Greeks, undaunted, stood.
As when the wind from off a threshing-floor,
Where men are winnowing, blows the chaff away;
When yellow Ceres with the breeze divides
The corn and chaff, which lies in whit’ning heaps;
So thick the Greeks were whiten’d o’er with dust,
Which to the brazen vault of Heav’n arose
Beneath the horses’ feet, that with the crowd
Were mingled, by their drivers turn’d to flight.
Unwearied still, they bore the brunt; but Mars
The Trojans succouring, the battle-field
Veil’d in thick clouds, from ev’ry quarter brought.
Thus he of Phoebus of the golden sword
Obey’d th’ injunction, bidding him arouse
The courage of the Trojans, when he saw
Pallas approaching to support the Greeks.

Then from the wealthy shrine Apollo’s self
Æneas brought, and vigour fresh infus’d:
Amid his comrades once again he stood;
They joy’d to see him yet alive, and sound,
And full of vigour; yet no question ask’d:
No time for question then, amid the toils
Impos’d by Phoebus of the silver bow,
And blood-stain’d Mars, and Discord unappeas’d.

Meanwhile Ulysses, and th’ Ajaces both,
And Diomed, with courage for the fight
The Grecian force inspir’d; they undismay’d
Shrank not before the Trojans’ rush and charge;
In masses firm they stood, as when the clouds
Are gather’d round the misty mountain top
By Saturn’s son, in breathless calm, while sleep
The force of Boreas and the stormy winds,
That with their breath the shadowy clouds disperse;
So stood the Greeks, nor shunn’d the Trojans’ charge.
Through all the army Agamemnon pass’d,
And cried, “Brave comrades, quit ye now like men;
Bear a stout heart; and in the stubborn fight,
Let each to other mutual succour give;
By mutual succour more are sav’d than fall;
In timid flight nor fame nor safety lies.”

Thus he: and straight his jav’lin threw, and struck
A man of mark, Æneas’ faithful friend,
Deicoon, the son of Pergasus,
By Troy, as ever foremost in the field,
In equal honour held with Priam’s sons.
His shield the monarch Agamemnon struck;
The shield’s defence was vain; the spear pass’d through
Beneath the belt, and in his groin was lodg’d;
Thund’ring he fell, and loud his armour rang.

On th’ other side, Æneas slew two chiefs,
The bravest of the Greeks, Orsilochus
And Crethon, sons of Diocles, who dwelt
In thriving Phera; rich in substance he,
And from the mighty River Alpheus trac’d
His high descent, who through the Pylian land
His copious waters pours; to him was born
Orsilochus, of num’rous tribes the chief;
To him succeeded valiant Diocles;
To whom were born twin sons, Orsilochus
And Crethon, skill’d in ev’ry point of war.
They, in the vigour of their youth, to Troy
Had sail’d amid the dark-ribb’d ships of Greece,
Of Atreus’ sons the quarrel to uphold;
But o’er them both the shades of death were spread.
As two young lions, by their tawny dam
Nurs’d in the mountain forest’s deep recess,
On flocks and herds their youthful fury pour,
With havoc to the sheepfolds, till themselves
Succumb, o’ermaster’d by the hand of man:
So fell these two beneath Æneas’ hand,
And like two lofty pines in death they lay.

The warlike Menelaus saw their fall
With pitying eye; and through the foremost ranks
With brandish’d spear advanc’d, by Mars impell’d,
Who hop’d his death by great Æneas’ hand.
Him Nestor’s son, Antilochus, beheld,
And hasten’d to his aid; for much he fear’d
Lest ill befall the monarch, and his death
Deprive them of their warlike labours’ fruit.
They two, with force combined of hand and spear,
Press’d onward to the fight; Antilochus
His station keeping close beside the King.
Before the two combined, Æneas fear’d,
Bold warrior as he was, to hold his ground.
The slain they drew within the Grecian lines,
Placed in their comrades’ hands, and turning back
Amid the foremost mingled in the fray.
Then, brave as Mars, Pylaemenes they slew,
The buckler’d Paphlagonians’ warlike chief;
Him Menelaus, hand to hand engag’d,
Pierc’d with a spear-thrust through the collar-bone;
While, with a pond’rous stone, Antilochus
Full on the elbow smote Atymnius’ son,
Mydon, his charioteer, in act to turn
His fiery steeds to flight; down from his hands
Fell to the ground the iv’ry-mounted reins.
On rush’d Antilochus, and with his sword
Across the temples smote him; gasping, he
Upon his neck and shoulders from the car
Pitch’d headlong; and (for there the sand was deep)
Awhile stood balanc’d, till the horses’ feet
Dash’d him upon the ground; Antilochus,
The horses seizing, drove them to the ships.

Hector beheld athwart the ranks, and rush’d,
Loud shouting, to th’ encounter; at his back
Follow’d the thronging bands of Troy, by Mars
And fierce Bellona led; she by the hand
Wild Uproar held; while Mars a giant spear
Brandish’d aloft: and stalking now before,
Now following after Hector, urg’d them on.
Quail’d at the sight the valiant Diomed:
As when a man, long journeying o’er the plain,
All unprepar’d, stands sudden on the brink
Of a swift stream, down rushing to the sea,
Boiling with foam, and back recoils; so then
Recoil’d Tydides, and address’d the crowd:
“O friends, we marvel at the might display’d
By Hector, spearman skill’d and warrior bold;
But still some guardian God his steps attends,
And shields from danger; now beside him stands,
In likeness of a mortal, Mars himself.
Then turning still your faces to your foes,
Retire, nor venture with the Gods to fight.”

He said; the Trojans now were close at hand,
And, mounted both upon a single car,
Two chiefs, Menesthes and Anchialus,
Well skill’d in war, by Hector’s hand were slain.

With pitying eyes great Ajax Telamon
Beheld their fall; advancing close, he threw
His glitt’ring spear; the son of Selagus
It struck, Amphius, who in Paesus dwelt,
In land and substance rich; by evil fate
Impell’d, to Priam’s house he brought his aid.
Below the belt the spear of Ajax struck,
And in his groin the point was buried deep;
Thund’ring he fell; then forward Ajax sprang
To seize the spoils of war; but fast and fierce
The Trojans show’r’d their weapons bright and keen,
And many a lance the mighty shield receiv’d.
Ajax, his foot firm planted on the slain,
Withdrew the brazen spear; yet could not strip
His armour off, so galling flew the shafts;
And much he fear’d his foes might hem him in,
Who closely press’d upon him, many and brave;
And, valiant as he was, and tall, and strong,
Still drove him backward; he perforce retired.

Thus labour’d they amid the stubborn fight.
Then evil fate induc’d Tlepolemus,
Valiant and strong, the son of Hercules,
Heav’n-born Sarpedon to confront in fight.
When near they came, of cloud-compelling Jove
Grandson and son, Tlepolemus began:
“Sarpedon, Lycian chief, what brings thee here,
Trembling and crouching, all unskill’d in war?
Falsely they speak who fable thee the son
Of aegis-bearing Jove; so far art thou
Beneath their mark who claim’d in elder days
That royal lineage: such my father was,
Of courage resolute, of lion heart.
With but six ships, and with a scanty band,
The horses by Laomedon withheld
Avenging, he o’erthrew this city, Troy,
And made her streets a desert; but thy soul
Is poor, thy troops are wasting fast away;
Nor deem I that the Trojans will in thee
(Ev’n were thy valour more) and Lycia’s aid
Their safeguard find; but vanquish’d by my hand,
This day the gates of Hades thou shalt pass.”

To whom the Lycian chief, Sarpedon, thus:
“Tlepolemus, the sacred walls of Troy
Thy sire o’erthrew, by folly of one man,
Laomedon, who with injurious words
His noble service recompens’d; nor gave
The promis’d steeds, for which he came from far.
For thee, I deem thou now shalt meet thy doom
Here, at my hand; on thee my spear shall win
Renown for me, thy soul to Hades send.”

Thus as Sarpedon spoke, Tlepolemus
Uprais’d his ashen spear; from both their hands
The pond’rous weapons simultaneous flew.
Full in the throat Tlepolemus receiv’d
Sarpedon’s spear; right through the neck it pass’d,
And o’er his eyes the shades of death were spread.
On th’ other side his spear Sarpedon struck
On the left thigh; the eager weapon pass’d
Right through the flesh, and in the bone was fix’d;
The stroke of death his father turn’d aside.
Sarpedon from the field his comrades bore,
Weigh’d down and tortured by the trailing spear,
For, in their haste to bear him to his car,
Not one bethought him from his thigh to draw
The weapon forth; so sorely were they press’d.

The Greeks too from the battle-field convey’d
The slain Tlepolemus; Ulysses saw,
Patient of spirit, but deeply mov’d at heart;
And with conflicting thoughts his breast was torn,
If first he should pursue the Thund’rer’s son,
Or deal destruction on the Lycian host.
But fate had not decreed the valiant son
Of Jove to fall beneath Ulysses’ hand;
So on the Lycians Pallas turn’d his wrath.
Alastor then, and Coeranus he slew,
Chromius, Alcander, Halius, Prytanis,
Noemon; nor had ended then the list
Of Lycian warriors by Ulysses slain;
But Hector of the glancing helm beheld;
Through the front ranks he rush’d, with burnish’d crest
Resplendent, flashing terror on the Greeks;
With joy Sarpedon saw his near approach,
And with imploring tones address’d him thus:

“Hector, thou son of Priam, leave me not
A victim to the Greeks, but lend thine aid:
Then in your city let me end my days.
For not to me is giv’n again to see
My native land; or, safe returning home,
To glad my sorrowing wife and infant child.”

Thus he; but Hector, answ’ring not a word,
Pass’d on in silence, hasting to pursue
The Greeks, and pour destruction on their host.

Beneath the oak of aegis-bearing Jove
His faithful comrades laid Sarpedon down,
And from his thigh the valiant Pelagon,
His lov’d companion, drew the ashen spear.
He swoon’d, and giddy mists o’erspread his eyes:
But soon reviv’d, as on his forehead blew,
While yet he gasp’d for breath, the cooling breeze.

By Mars and Hector of the brazen helm
The Greeks hard-press’d, yet fled not to their ships,
Nor yet sustain’d the fight; but back retir’d
Soon as they learned the presence of the God.
Say then who first, who last, the prowess felt
Of Hector, Priam’s son, and mail-clad Mars?
The godlike Teuthras first, Orestes next,
Bold charioteer; th’ Ætolian spearman skill’d,
Trechus, Œnomaus, and Helenus,
The son of Œnops; and Oresbius, girt
With sparkling girdle; he in Hyla dwelt,
The careful Lord of boundless wealth, beside
Cephisus’ marshy banks; Bœotia’s chiefs
Around him dwelt, on fat and fertile soil.
Juno, the white-arm’d Queen, who saw these two
The Greeks destroying in the stubborn fight,
To Pallas thus her winged words address’d:
“O Heav’n! brave child of aegis-bearing Jove,
Vain was our word to Menelaus giv’n.
That he the well-built walls of Troy should raze,
And safe return, if unrestrain’d we leave
Ferocious Mars to urge his mad career.
Come then; let us too mingle in the fray.”

She said: and Pallas, blue-ey’d Maid, complied.
Offspring of Saturn, Juno, heav’nly Queen,
Herself th’ immortal steeds caparison’d,
Adorn’d with golden frontlets: to the car
Hebe the circling wheels of brass attach’d,
Eight-spok’d, that on an iron axle turn’d;
The felloes were of gold, and fitted round
With brazen tires, a marvel to behold;
The naves were silver, rounded every way:
The chariot-board on gold and silver bands
Was hung, and round it ran a double rail:
The pole was all of silver; at the end
A golden yoke, with golden yoke-bands fair:
And Juno, all on fire to join the fray,
Beneath the yoke the flying coursers led.

Pallas, the child of aegis-bearing Jove,
Within her father’s threshold dropp’d her veil,
Of airy texture, work of her own hands;
The cuirass donn’d of cloud-compelling Jove,
And stood accoutred for the bloody fray.
Her tassell’d aegis round her shoulders next
She threw, with Terror circled all around;
And on its face were figur’d deeds of arms,
And Strife, and Courage high, and panic Rout;
There too a Gorgon’s head, of monstrous size,
Frown’d terrible, portent of angry Jove:
And on her head a golden helm she plac’d,
Four-crested, double-peak’d, whose ample verge
A hundred cities’ champions might suffice:
Her fiery car she mounted: in her hand
A spear she bore, long, weighty, tough; wherewith
The mighty daughter of a mighty sire
Sweeps down the ranks of those her hate pursues.

Then Juno sharply touch’d the flying steeds:
Forthwith spontaneous opening, grated harsh
The heavenly portals, guarded by the Hours,
Who Heav’n and high Olympus have in charge
To roll aside, or draw the veil of cloud.
Through these th’ excited horses held their way.
They found the son of Saturn, from the Gods
Sitting apart, upon the highest crest
Of many-ridg’d Olympus; there arriv’d,
The white-arm’d Goddess Juno stay’d her steeds,
And thus address’d the Sov’reign Lord of Heav’n:

“O Father Jove! canst thou behold unmov’d
The violence of Mars? how many Greeks,
Reckless and uncontroll’d, he hath destroy’d;
To me a source of bitter grief; meanwhile
Venus and Phoebus of the silver bow
Look on, well pleas’d, who sent this madman forth,
To whom both law and justice are unknown.
Say, Father Jove, shall I thine anger move,
If with disgrace I drive him from the field?”

To whom the Cloud-compeller thus replied:
“Go, send against him Pallas; she, I know,
Hath oft inflicted on him grievous pain.”.

He said: the white-arm’d Queen with joy obey’d;
She urg’d her horses; nothing loth, they flew
Midway between the earth, and starry Heav’n:
Far as his sight extends, who from on high
Looks from his watch-tow’r o’er the dark-blue sea,
So far at once the neighing horses bound.
But when to Troy they came, beside the streams
Where Simois’ and Scamander’s waters meet,
The white-arm’d Goddess stay’d her flying steeds,
Loos’d from the car, and veil’d in densest cloud.
For them, at bidding of the river-God,
Ambrosial forage grew: the Goddesses,
Swift as the wild wood-pigeon’s rapid flight,
Sped to the battle-field to aid the Greeks.
But when they reach’d the thickest of the fray,
Where throng’d around the might of Diomed
The bravest and the best, as lions fierce,
Or forest-boars, the mightiest of their kind,
There stood the white-arm’d Queen, and call’d aloud,
In form of Stentor, of the brazen voice,
Whose shout was as the shout of fifty men:

“Shame on ye, Greeks, base cowards! brave alone
In outward semblance; while Achilles yet
Went forth to battle, from the Dardan gates
The Trojans never ventur’d to advance,
So dreaded they his pond’rous spear; but now
Far from the walls, beside your ships, they fight.”

She said: her words their drooping courage rous’d.
Meanwhile the blue-ey’d Pallas went in haste
In search of Tydeus’ son; beside his car
She found the King, in act to cool the wound
Inflicted by the shaft of Pandarus:
Beneath his shield’s broad belt the clogging sweat
Oppress’d him, and his arm was faint with toil;
The belt was lifted up, and from the wound
He wip’d the clotted blood: beside the car
The Goddess stood, and touch’d the yoke, and said:

“Little like Tydeus’ self is Tydeus’ son:
Low was his stature, but his spirit was high:
And ev’n when I from combat rashly wag’d
Would fain have kept him back, what time in Thebes
He found himself, an envoy and alone,
Without support, among the Thebans all,
I counsell’d him in peace to share the feast:
But by his own impetuous courage led,
He challenged all the Thebans to contend
With him in wrestling, and o’erthrew them all
With ease; so mighty was the aid I gave.
Thee now I stand beside, and guard from harm,
And bid thee boldly with the Trojans fight.
But, if the labours of the battle-field
O’ertask thy limbs, or heartless fear restrain,
No issue thou of valiant Tydeus’ loins.”

Whom answer’d thus the valiant Diomed:
“I know thee, Goddess, who thou art; the child
Of aegis-bearing Jove: to thee my mind
I freely speak, nor aught will I conceal.
Nor heartless fear, nor hesitating doubt,
Restrain me; but I bear thy words in mind,
With other of th’ Immortals not to fight:
But should Jove’s daughter, Venus, dare the fray,
At her I need not shun to throw my spear.
Therefore I thus withdrew, and others too
Exhorted to retire, since Mars himself
I saw careering o’er the battle-field.”

To whom the blue-ey’d Goddess, Pallas, thus:
“Thou son of Tydeus, dearest to my soul,
Fear now no more with Mars himself to fight,
Nor other God; such aid will I bestow.
Come then; at him the first direct thy car;
Encounter with him hand to hand; nor fear
To strike this madman, this incarnate curse,
This shameless renegade; who late agreed
With Juno and with me to combat Troy,
And aid the Grecian cause; who now appears,
The Greeks deserting, in the Trojan ranks.”

Thus Pallas spoke, and stretching forth her hand
Backward his comrade Sthenelus she drew
From off the chariot; down in haste he sprang.
His place beside the valiant Diomed
The eager Goddess took; beneath the weight
Loud groan’d the oaken axle; for the car
A mighty Goddess and a Hero bore.
Then Pallas took the whip and reins, and urg’d
Direct at Mars the fiery coursers’ speed.

The bravest of th’ Ætolians, Periphas,
Ochesius’ stalwart son, he just had slain,
And stood in act to strip him of his arms.
The helmet then of Darkness Pallas donn’d,
To hide her presence from the sight of Mars:
But when the blood-stain’d God of War beheld
Advancing tow’rd him godlike Diomed,
The corpse of stalwart Periphas he left,
There where he fell, to lie; while he himself
Of valiant Diomed th’ encounter met.
When near they came, first Mars his pond’rous spear
Advanc’d beyond the yoke and horses’ reins,
With murd’rous aim; but Pallas from the car
Turn’d it aside, and foil’d the vain attempt.

Then Diomed thrust forward in his turn
His pond’rous spear; low on the flank of Mars,
Guided by Pallas, with successful aim,
Just where the belt was girt, the weapon struck:
It pierc’d the flesh, and straight was back withdrawn:
Then Mars cried out aloud, with such a shout
As if nine thousand or ten thousand men
Should simultaneous raise their battle-cry:
Trojans and Greeks alike in terror heard,
Trembling; so fearful was the cry of Mars.
As black with clouds appears the darken’d air,
When after heat the blust’ring winds arise,
So Mars to valiant Diomed appear’d,
As in thick clouds he took his heav’nward flight.
With speed he came to great Olympus’ heights,
Th’ abode of Gods; and sitting by the throne
Of Saturn’s son, with anguish torn, he show’d
Th’ immortal stream that trickled from the wound,
And thus to Jove his piteous words address’d:

“O Father Jove, canst thou behold unmov’d
These acts of violence? the greatest ills
We Gods endure, we each to other owe
Who still in human quarrels interpose.
Of thee we all complain; thy senseless child
Is ever on some evil deed intent.
The other Gods, who on Olympus dwell,
Are all to thee obedient and submiss;
But thy pernicious daughter, nor by word
Nor deed dost thou restrain; who now excites
Th’ o’erbearing son of Tydeus, Diomed,
Upon th’ immortal Gods to vent his rage.
Venus of late he wounded in the wrist,
And, as a God, but now encounter’d me:
Barely I ’scap’d by swiftness of my feet;
Else, ’mid a ghastly heap of corpses slain,
In anguish had I lain; and, if alive,
Yet liv’d disabl’d by his weapon’s stroke.”

Whom answer’d thus the Cloud-compeller, Jove,
With look indignant: “Come no more to me,
Thou wav’ring turncoat, with thy whining pray’rs:
Of all the Gods who on Olympus dwell
I hate thee most; for thou delight’st in nought
But strife and war; thou hast inherited
Thy mother, Juno’s, proud, unbending mood,
Whom I can scarce control; and thou, methinks,
To her suggestions ow’st thy present plight.
Yet since thou art my offspring, and to me
Thy mother bore thee, I must not permit
That thou should’st long be doom’d to suffer pain;
But had thy birth been other than it is,
For thy misdoings thou hadst long ere now
Been banish’d from the Gods’ companionship.”

He said: and straight to Paeon gave command
To heal the wound; with soothing anodynes
He heal’d it quickly; soon as liquid milk
Is curdled by the fig-tree’s juice, and turns
In whirling flakes, so soon was heal’d the wound.
By Hebe bath’d, and rob’d afresh, he sat
In health and strength restor’d, by Saturn’s son.

Mars thus arrested in his murd’rous course,
Together to th’ abode of Jove return’d
The Queen of Argos and the blue-ey’d Maid.





The Gods had left the field, and o’er the plain
Hither and thither surg’d the tide of war,
As couch’d th’ opposing chiefs their brass-tipp’d spears,
Midway ’twixt Simois’ and Scamander’s streams.

First through the Trojan phalanx broke his way
The son of Telamon, the prop of Greece,
The mighty Ajax; on his friends the light
Of triumph shedding, as Eusorus’ son
He smote, the noblest of the Thracian bands,
Valiant and strong, the gallant Acamas.
Full in the front, beneath the plumed helm,
The sharp spear struck, and crashing thro’ the bone,
The warrior’s eyes were clos’d in endless night.

Next valiant Diomed Axylus slew,
The son of Teuthranes, who had his home
In fair Arisba; rich in substance he,
And lov’d of all; for, dwelling near the road,
He op’d to all his hospitable gate;
But none of all he entertain’d was there
To ward aside the bitter doom of death:
There fell they both, he and his charioteer,
Calesius, who athwart the battle-field
His chariot drove; one fate o’ertook them both.

Then Dresus and Opheltius of their arms
Euryalus despoil’d; his hot pursuit
Æsepus next, and Pedasus assail’d,
Brothers, whom Abarbarea, Naiad nymph,
To bold Bucolion bore; Bucolion, son
Of great Laomedon, his eldest born,
Though bastard: he upon the mountain side,
On which his flocks he tended, met the nymph,
And of their secret loves twin sons were born;
Whom now at once Euryalus of strength
And life depriv’d, and of their armour stripp’d.

By Polypoetes’ hand, in battle strong,
Was slain Astyalus; Pidutes fell,
Chief of Percote, by Ulysses’ spear;
And Teucer godlike Aretaon slew.
Antilochus, the son of Nestor, smote
With gleaming lance Ablerus; Elatus
By Agamemnon, King of men, was slain,
Who dwelt by Satnois’ widely-flowing stream,
Upon the lofty heights of Pedasus.
By Leitus was Phylacus in flight
O’erta’en; Eurypylus Melanthius slew.

Then Menelaus, good in battle, took
Adrastus captive; for his horses, scar’d
And rushing wildly o’er the plain, amid
The tangled tamarisk scrub his chariot broke,
Snapping the pole; they with the flying crowd
Held city-ward their course; he from the car
Hurl’d headlong, prostrate lay beside the wheel,
Prone on his face in dust; and at his side,
Poising his mighty spear, Atrides stood.
Adrastus clasp’d his knees, and suppliant cried,
“Spare me, great son of Atreus! for my life
Accept a price; my wealthy father’s house
A goodly store contains of brass, and gold,
And well-wrought iron; and of these he fain
Would pay a noble ransom, could he hear
That in the Grecian ships I yet surviv’d.”

His words to pity mov’d the victor’s breast;
Then had he bade his followers to the ships
The captive bear; but running up in haste.
Fierce Agamemnon cried in stern rebuke;

“Soft-hearted Menelaus, why of life
So tender? Hath thy house receiv’d indeed
Nothing but benefits at Trojan hands?
Of that abhorred race, let not a man
Escape the deadly vengeance of our arms;
No, not the infant in its mother’s womb;
No, nor the fugitive; but be they all,
They and their city, utterly destroy’d,
Uncar’d for, and from mem’ry blotted out.”

Thus as he spoke, his counsel, fraught with death,
His brother’s purpose chang’d; he with his hand
Adrastus thrust aside, whom with his lance
Fierce Agamemnon through the loins transfix’d;
And, as he roll’d in death, upon his breast
Planting his foot, the ashen spear withdrew.

Then loudly Nestor shouted to the Greeks:
“Friends, Grecian heroes, ministers of Mars!
Loiter not now behind, to throw yourselves
Upon the prey, and bear it to the ships;
Let all your aim be now to kill; anon
Ye may at leisure spoil your slaughter’d foes.”

With words like these he fir’d the blood of all.
Now had the Trojans by the warlike Greeks
In coward flight within their walls been driv’n;
But to Æneas and to Hector thus
The son of Priam, Helenus, the best
Of all the Trojan seers, address’d his speech:
“Æneas, and thou Hector, since on you,
Of all the Trojans and the Lycian hosts,
Is laid the heaviest burthen, for that ye
Excel alike in council and in fight,
Stand here awhile, and moving to and fro
On ev’ry side, around the gates exhort
The troops to rally, lest they fall disgrac’d,
Flying for safety to their women’s arms,
And foes, exulting, triumph in their shame.
Their courage thus restor’d, worn as we are,
We with the Greeks will still maintain the fight,
For so, perforce, we must; but, Hector, thou
Haste to the city; there our mother find,
Both thine and mine; on Ilium’s topmost height
By all the aged dames accompanied,
Bid her the shrine of blue-ey’d Pallas seek;
Unlock the sacred gates; and on the knees
Of fair-hair’d Pallas place the fairest robe
In all the house, the amplest, best esteem’d;
And at her altar vow to sacrifice
Twelve yearling kine that never felt the goad,
So she have pity on the Trojan state,
Our wives, and helpless babes, and turn away
The fiery son of Tydeus, spearman fierce,
The Minister of Terror; bravest he,
In my esteem, of all the Grecian chiefs:
For not Achilles’ self, the prince of men,
Though Goddess-born, such dread inspir’d; so fierce
His rage; and with his prowess none may vie.”

He said, nor uncomplying, Hector heard
His brother’s counsel; from his car he leap’d
In arms upon the plain; and brandish’d high
His jav’lins keen, and moving to and fro
The troops encourag’d, and restor’d the fight.
Rallying they turn’d, and fac’d again the Greeks:
These ceas’d from slaughter, and in turn gave way,
Deeming that from the starry Heav’n some God
Had to the rescue come; so fierce they turn’d.
Then to the Trojans Hector call’d aloud:

“Ye valiant Trojans, and renown’d Allies,
Quit you like men; remember now, brave friends,
Your wonted valour; I to Ilium go
To bid our wives and rev’rend Elders raise
To Heav’n their pray’rs, with vows of hecatombs.”

Thus saying, Hector of the glancing helm
Turn’d to depart; and as he mov’d along,
The black bull’s-hide his neck and ancles smote,
The outer circle of his bossy shield.

Then Tydeus’ son, and Glaucus, in the midst,
Son of Hippolochus, stood forth to fight;
But when they near were met, to Glaucus first
The valiant Diomed his speech address’d:
“Who art thou, boldest man of mortal birth?
For in the glorious conflict heretofore
I ne’er have seen thee; but in daring now
Thou far surpassest all, who hast not fear’d
To face my spear; of most unhappy sires
The children they, who my encounter meet.
But if from Heav’n thou com’st, and art indeed
A God, I fight not with the heav’nly powers.
Not long did Dryas’ son, Lycurgus brave,
Survive, who dar’d th’ Immortals to defy:
He, ’mid their frantic orgies, in the groves
Of lovely Nyssa, put to shameful rout
The youthful Bacchus’ nurses; they, in fear,
Dropp’d each her thyrsus, scatter’d by the hand
Of fierce Lycurgus, with an ox-goad arm’d.
Bacchus himself beneath the ocean wave
In terror plung’d, and, trembling, refuge found
In Thetis’ bosom from a mortal’s threats:
The Gods indignant saw, and Saturn’s son
Smote him with blindness; nor surviv’d he long,
Hated alike by all th’ immortal Gods.
I dare not then the blessed Gods oppose;
But be thou mortal, and the fruits of earth
Thy food, approach, and quickly meet thy doom.”

To whom the noble Glaucus thus replied:
“Great son of Tydeus, why my race enquire?
The race of man is as the race of leaves:
Of leaves, one generation by the wind
Is scattered on the earth; another soon
In spring’s luxuriant verdure bursts to light.
So with our race; these flourish, those decay.
But if thou wouldst in truth enquire and learn
The race I spring from, not unknown of men;
There is a city, in the deep recess
Of pastoral Argos, Ephyre by name:
There Sisyphus of old his dwelling had,
Of mortal men the craftiest; Sisyphus,
The son of Æolus; to him was born
Glaucus; and Glaucus in his turn begot
Bellerophon, on whom the Gods bestow’d
The gifts of beauty and of manly grace.
But Proetus sought his death; and, mightier far,
From all the coasts of Argos drove him forth,
To Proetus subjected by Jove’s decree.
For him the monarch’s wife, Antaea, nurs’d
A madd’ning passion, and to guilty love
Would fain have tempted him; but fail’d to move
The upright soul of chaste Bellerophon.
With lying words she then address’d the King:
‘Die, Proetus, thou, or slay Bellerophon,
Who basely sought my honour to assail.’
The King with anger listen’d to her words;
Slay him he would not; that his soul abhorr’d;
But to the father of his wife, the King
Of Lycia, sent him forth, with tokens charg’d
Of dire import, on folded tablets trac’d,
Pois’ning the monarch’s mind, to work his death.
To Lycia, guarded by the Gods, he went;
But when he came to Lycia, and the streams
Of Xanthus, there with hospitable rites
The King of wide-spread Lycia welcom’d him.
Nine days he feasted him, nine oxen slew;
But with the tenth return of rosy morn
He question’d him, and for the tokens ask’d
He from his son-in-law, from Proetus, bore.
The tokens’ fatal import understood,
He bade him first the dread Chimaera slay;
A monster, sent from Heav’n, not human born,
With head of lion, and a serpent’s tail,
And body of a goat; and from her mouth
There issued flames of fiercely-burning fire:
Yet her, confiding in the Gods, he slew.
Next, with the valiant Solymi he fought,
The fiercest fight that e’er he undertook.
Thirdly, the women-warriors he o’erthrew,
The Amazons; from whom returning home,
The King another stratagem devis’d;
For, choosing out the best of Lycia’s sons,
He set an ambush; they return’d not home,
For all by brave Bellerophon were slain.
But, by his valour when the King perceiv’d
His heav’nly birth, he entertain’d him well;
Gave him his daughter; and with her the half
Of all his royal honours he bestow’d:
A portion too the Lycians meted out,
Fertile in corn and wine, of all the state
The choicest land, to be his heritage.
Three children there to brave Bellerophon
Were born; Isander, and Hippolochus,
Laodamia last, belov’d of Jove,
The Lord of counsel; and to him she bore
Godlike Sarpedon of the brazen helm.
Bellerophon at length the wrath incurr’d
Of all the Gods; and to th’ Aleian plain
Alone he wander’d; there he wore away
His soul, and shunn’d the busy haunts of men.
Insatiate Mars his son Isander slew
In battle with the valiant Solymi:
His daughter perish’d by Diana’s wrath.
I from Hippolochus my birth derive:
To Troy he sent me, and enjoin’d me oft
To aim at highest honours, and surpass
My comrades all; nor on my father’s name
Discredit bring, who held the foremost place
In Ephyre, and Lycia’s wide domain.
Such is my race, and such the blood I boast.”

He said; and Diomed rejoicing heard:
His spear he planted in the fruitful ground,
And thus with friendly words the chief address’d:

“By ancient ties of friendship are we bound;
For godlike Œneus in his house receiv’d
For twenty days the brave Bellerophon;
They many a gift of friendship interchang’d;
A belt, with crimson glowing, Œneus gave;
Bellerophon a double cup of gold,
Which in my house I left when here I came.
Of Tydeus no remembrance I retain;
For yet a child he left me, when he fell
With his Achaians at the gate of Thebes.
So I in Argos am thy friendly host;
Thou mine in Lycia, when I thither come:
Then shun we, e’en amid the thickest fight,
Each other’s lance; enough there are for me
Of Trojans and their brave allies to kill,
As Heav’n may aid me, and my speed of foot;
And Greeks enough there are for thee to slay,
If so indeed thou canst; but let us now
Our armour interchange, that these may know
What friendly bonds of old our houses join.”
Thus as they spoke, they quitted each his car;
Clasp’d hand in hand, and plighted mutual faith.
Then Glaucus of his judgment Jove depriv’d,
His armour interchanging, gold for brass,
A hundred oxen’s worth for that of nine.

Meanwhile, when Hector reach’d the oak beside
The Scaean gate, around him throng’d the wives
Of Troy, and daughters, anxious to enquire
The fate of children, brothers, husbands, friends;
He to the Gods exhorted all to pray,
For deep the sorrows that o’er many hung.
But when to Priam’s splendid house he came,
With polish’d corridors adorn’d—within
Were fifty chambers, all of polish’d stone,
Plac’d each by other; there the fifty sons
Of Priam with their wedded wives repos’d;
On th’ other side, within the court were built
Twelve chambers, near the roof, of polish’d stone,
Plac’d each by other; there the sons-in-law
Of Priam with their spouses chaste repos’d;
To meet him there his tender mother came,
And with her led the young Laodice,
Fairest of all her daughters; clasping then
His hands, she thus address’d him: “Why, my son,
Why com’st thou here, and leav’st the battle-field?
Are Trojans by those hateful sons of Greece,
Fighting around the city, sorely press’d?
And com’st thou, by thy spirit mov’d, to raise,
On Ilium’s heights, thy hands in pray’r to Jove?
But tarry till I bring the luscious wine,
That first to Jove, and to th’ Immortals all,
Thou mayst thine off’ring pour; then with the draught
Thyself thou mayst refresh; for great the strength
Which gen’rous wine imparts to men who toil,
As thou hast toil’d, thy comrades to protect.”

To whom great Hector of the glancing helm:
“No, not for me, mine honour’d mother, pour
The luscious wine, lest thou unnerve my limbs,
And make me all my wonted prowess lose.
The ruddy wine I dare not pour to Jove
With hands unwash’d; nor to the cloud-girt son
Of Saturn may the voice of pray’r ascend
From one with blood bespatter’d and defil’d.
Thou, with the elder women, seek the shrine
Of Pallas; bring your gifts; and on the knees
Of fair-hair’d Pallas place the fairest robe
In all the house, the amplest, best esteem’d;
And at her altar vow to sacrifice
Twelve yearling kine, that never felt the goad;
So she have pity on the Trojan state,
Our wives, and helpless babes; and turn away
The fiery son of Tydeus, spearman fierce,
The Minister of Terror; to the shrine
Of Pallas thou; to Paris I, to call
If haply he will hear; would that the earth
Would gape and swallow him! for great the curse
That Jove thro’ him hath brought on men of Troy,
On noble Priam, and on Priam’s sons.
Could I but know that he were in his grave,
Methinks my sorrows I could half forget.”

He said: she, to the house returning, sent
Th’ attendants through the city, to collect
The train of aged suppliants; she meanwhile
Her fragrant chamber sought, wherein were stor’d
Rich garments by Sidonian women work’d,
Whom godlike Paris had from Sidon brought,
Sailing the broad sea o’er, the selfsame path
By which the high-born Helen he convey’d.
Of these, the richest in embroidery,
The amplest, and the brightest, as a star
Refulgent, plac’d with care beneath the rest,
The Queen her off’ring bore to Pallas’ shrine:
She went, and with her many an ancient dame.
But when the shrine they reach’d on Ilium’s height,
Theano, fair of face, the gates unlock’d,
Daughter of Cisseus, sage Antenor’s wife,
By Trojans nam’d at Pallas’ shrine to serve.
They with deep moans to Pallas rais’d their hands;
But fair Theano took the robe, and plac’d
On Pallas’ knees, and to the heav’nly Maid,
Daughter of Jove, she thus address’d her pray’r:
“Guardian of cities, Pallas, awful Queen,
Goddess of Goddesses, break thou the spear
Of Tydeus’ son; and grant that he himself
Prostrate before the Scaean gates may fall;
So at thine altar will we sacrifice
Twelve yearling kine, that never felt the goad,
If thou have pity on the state of Troy,
The wives of Trojans, and their helpless babes.”

Thus she; but Pallas answer’d not her pray’r.
While thus they call’d upon the heav’nly Maid,
Hector to Paris’ mansion bent his way;
A noble structure, which himself had built
Aided by all the best artificers
Who in the fertile realm of Troy were known;
With chambers, hall, and court, on Ilium’s height,
Near to where Priam’s self and Hector dwelt.
There enter’d Hector, well belov’d of Jove;
And in his hand his pond’rous spear he bore,
Twelve cubits long; bright flash’d the weapon’s point
Of polish’d brass, with circling hoop of gold.
There in his chamber found he whom he sought,
About his armour busied, polishing
His shield, his breastplate, and his bended bow.
While Argive Helen, ’mid her maidens plac’d,
The skilful labours of their hands o’erlook’d.
To him thus Hector with reproachful words;
“Thou dost not well thine anger to indulge;
In battle round the city’s lofty wall
The people fast are falling; thou the cause
That fiercely thus around the city burns
The flame of war and battle; and thyself
Wouldst others blame, who from the fight should shrink.
Up, ere the town be wrapp’d in hostile fires.”

To whom in answer godlike Paris thus:
“Hector, I own not causeless thy rebuke;
Yet will I speak; hear thou and understand;
’Twas less from anger with the Trojan host,
And fierce resentment, that I here remain’d,
Than that I sought my sorrow to indulge;
Yet hath my wife, e’en now, with soothing words
Urg’d me to join the battle; so, I own,
’Twere best; and Vict’ry changes oft her side.
Then stay, while I my armour don; or thou
Go first: I, following, will o’ertake thee soon.”

He said: but Hector of the glancing helm
Made answer none; then thus with gentle tones
Helen accosted him: “Dear brother mine,
(Of me, degraded, sorrow-bringing, vile!)
Oh that the day my mother gave me birth
Some storm had on the mountains cast me forth!
Or that the many-dashing ocean’s waves
Had swept me off, ere all this woe were wrought!
Yet if these evils were of Heav’n ordain’d,
Would that a better man had call’d me wife;
A sounder judge of honour and disgrace:
For he, thou know’st, no firmness hath of mind,
Nor ever will; a want he well may rue.
But come thou in, and rest thee here awhile,
Dear brother, on this couch; for travail sore
Encompasseth thy soul, by me impos’d,
Degraded as I am, and Paris’ guilt;
On whom this burthen Heav’n hath laid, that shame
On both our names through years to come shall rest.”

To whom great Hector of the glancing helm:
“Though kind thy wish, yet, Helen, ask me not
To sit or rest; I cannot yield to thee:
For to the succour of our friends I haste,
Who feel my loss, and sorely need my aid.
But thou thy husband rouse, and let him speed,
That he may find me still within the walls.
For I too homeward go; to see once more
My household, and my wife, and infant child:
For whether I may e’er again return,
I know not, or if Heav’n have so decreed,
That I this day by Grecian hands should fall.”

Thus saying, Hector of the glancing helm
Turn’d to depart; with rapid step he reach’d
His own well-furnished house, but found not there
His white-arm’d spouse, the fair Andromache.
She with her infant child and maid the while
Was standing, bath’d in tears, in bitter grief,
On Ilium’s topmost tower: but when her Lord
Found not within the house his peerless wife,
Upon the threshold pausing, thus he spoke:
“Tell me, my maidens, tell me true, which way
Your mistress went, the fair Andromache;
Or to my sisters, or my brothers’ wives?
Or to the temple where the fair-hair’d dames
Of Troy invoke Minerva’s awful name?”

To whom the matron of his house replied:
“Hector, if truly we must answer thee,
Not to thy sisters, nor thy brothers’ wives,
Nor to the temple where the fair-hair’d dames
Of Troy invoke Minerva’s awful name,
But to the height of Ilium’s topmost tow’r
Andromache is gone; since tidings came
The Trojan force was overmatch’d, and great
The Grecian strength; whereat, like one distract,
She hurried to the walls, and with her took,
Borne in the nurse’s arms, her infant child.”

So spoke the ancient dame; and Hector straight
Through the wide streets his rapid steps retrac’d.
But when at last the mighty city’s length
Was travers’d, and the Scaean gates were reach’d,
Whence was the outlet to the plain, in haste
Running to meet him came his priceless wife,
Eetion’s daughter, fair Andromache;
Eetion, who from Thebes Cilicia sway’d,
Thebes, at the foot of Placos’ wooded heights.
His child to Hector of the brazen helm
Was giv’n in marriage: she it was who now
Met him, and by her side the nurse, who bore,
Clasp’d to her breast, his all unconscious child,
Hector’s lov’d infant, fair as morning star;
Whom Hector call’d Scamandrius, but the rest
Astyanax, in honour of his sire,
The matchless chief, the only prop of Troy.
Silent he smil’d as on his boy he gaz’d:
But at his side Andromache, in tears,
Hung on his arm, and thus the chief address’d:

“Dear Lord, thy dauntless spirit will work thy doom:
Nor hast thou pity on this thy helpless child,
Or me forlorn, to be thy widow soon:
For thee will all the Greeks with force combin’d
Assail and slay: for me, ’twere better far,
Of thee bereft, to lie beneath the sod;
Nor comfort shall be mine, if thou be lost,
But endless grief; to me nor sire is left,
Nor honour’d mother; fell Achilles’ hand
My sire Eetion slew, what time his arms
The populous city of Cilicia raz’d,
The lofty-gated Thebes; he slew indeed,
But stripp’d him not; he reverenc’d the dead;
And o’er his body, with his armour burnt,
A mound erected; and the mountain nymphs,
The progeny of aegis-bearing Jove,
Planted around his tomb a grove of elms.
There were sev’n brethren in my father’s house;
All in one day they fell, amid their herds
And fleecy flocks, by fierce Achilles’ hand.
My mother, Queen of Placos’ wooded height,
Brought with the captives here, he soon releas’d
For costly ransom; but by Dian’s shafts
She, in her father’s house, was stricken down.
But, Hector, thou to me art all in one,
Sire, mother, brethren! thou, my wedded love!
Then pitying us, within the tow’r remain,
Nor make thy child an orphan, and thy wife
A hapless widow; by the fig-tree here
Array thy troops; for here the city wall,
Easiest of access, most invites assault.
Thrice have their boldest chiefs this point assail’d,
The two Ajaces, brave Idomeneus,
Th’ Atridae both, and Tydeus’ warlike son,
Or by the prompting of some Heav’n-taught seer,
Or by their own advent’rous courage led.”

To whom great Hector of the glancing helm;
“Think not, dear wife, that by such thoughts as these
My heart has ne’er been wrung; but I should blush
To face the men and long-rob’d dames of Troy,
If, like a coward, I could shun the fight.
Nor could my soul the lessons of my youth
So far forget, whose boast it still has been
In the fore-front of battle to be found,
Charg’d with my father’s glory and mine own.
Yet in my inmost soul too well I know,
The day must come when this our sacred Troy,
And Priam’s race, and Priam’s royal self
Shall in one common ruin be o’erthrown.
But not the thoughts of Troy’s impending fate,
Nor Hecuba’s nor royal Priam’s woes,
Nor loss of brethren, numerous and brave,
By hostile hands laid prostrate in the dust,
So deeply wring my heart as thoughts of thee,
Thy days of freedom lost, and led away
A weeping captive by some brass-clad Greek;
Haply in Argos, at a mistress’ beck,
Condemn’d to ply the loom, or water draw
From Hypereia’s or Messeis’ fount,
Heart-wrung, by stern necessity constrain’d.
Then they who see thy tears perchance may say,
‘Lo! this was Hector’s wife, who, when they fought
On plains of Troy, was Ilium’s bravest chief.’
Thus may they speak; and thus thy grief renew
For loss of him, who might have been thy shield
To rescue thee from slav’ry’s bitter hour.
Oh may I sleep in dust, ere be condemn’d
To hear thy cries, and see thee dragg’d away!”

Thus as he spoke, great Hector stretch’d his arms
To take his child; but back the infant shrank,
Crying, and sought his nurse’s shelt’ring breast,
Scar’d by the brazen helm and horse-hair plume,
That nodded, fearful, on the warrior’s crest.
Laugh’d the fond parents both, and from his brow
Hector the casque remov’d, and set it down,
All glitt’ring, on the ground; then kiss’d his child,
And danc’d him in his arms; then thus to Jove
And to th’ Immortals all address’d his pray’r:
“Grant, Jove, and all ye Gods, that this my son
May be, as I, the foremost man of Troy,
For valour fam’d, his country’s guardian King;
That men may say, ‘This youth surpasses far
His father,’ when they see him from the fight,
From slaughter’d foes, with bloody spoils of war
Returning, to rejoice his mother’s heart!”

Thus saying, in his mother’s arms he plac’d
His child; she to her fragrant bosom clasp’d,
Smiling through tears; with eyes of pitying love
Hector beheld, and press’d her hand, and thus
Address’d her—“Dearest, wring not thus my heart!
For till my day of destiny is come,
No man may take my life; and when it comes,
Nor brave nor coward can escape that day.
But go thou home, and ply thy household cares,
The loom, and distaff, and appoint thy maids
Their sev’ral tasks; and leave to men of Troy
And, chief of all to me, the toils of war.”

Great Hector said, and rais’d his plumed helm;
And homeward, slow, with oft-reverted eyes,
Shedding hot tears, his sorrowing wife return’d.
Arriv’d at valiant Hector’s well-built house,
Her maidens press’d around her; and in all
Arose at once the sympathetic grief.
For Hector, yet alive, his household mourn’d,
Deeming he never would again return,
Safe from the fight, by Grecian hands unharm’d.

Nor linger’d Paris in his lofty halls;
But donn’d his armour, glitt’ring o’er with brass,
And through the city pass’d with bounding steps.
As some proud steed, at well-fill’d manger fed,
His halter broken, neighing, scours the plain,
And revels in the widely-flowing stream
To bathe his sides; then tossing high his head,
While o’er his shoulders streams his ample mane.
Light borne on active limbs, in conscious pride.
To the wide pastures of the mares he flies;
So Paris, Priam’s son, from Ilium’s height,
His bright arms flashing like the gorgeous sun,
Hasten’d, with boastful mien, and rapid step.
Hector he found, as from the spot he turn’d
Where with his wife he late had converse held;
Whom thus the godlike Paris first address’d:
“Too long, good brother, art then here detain’d,
Impatient for the fight, by my delay;
Nor have I timely, as thou bad’st me, come.”
To whom thus Hector of the glancing helm:
“My gallant brother, none who thinks aright
Can cavil at thy prowess in the field;
For thou art very valiant; but thy will
Is weak and sluggish; and it grieves my heart,
When from the Trojans, who in thy behalf
Such labours undergo, I hear thy name
Coupled with foul reproach! But go we now!
Henceforth shall all be well, if Jove permit
That from our shores we drive th’ invading Greeks,
And to the ever-living Gods of Heav’n
In peaceful homes our free libations pour.”





Thus as he spoke, from out the city gates
The noble Hector pass’d, and by his side
His brother Paris; in the breast of both
Burnt the fierce ardour of the battle-field.
As when some God a fav’ring breeze bestows
On seamen tugging at the well-worn oar,
Faint with excess of toil, ev’n so appear’d
Those brethren twain to Troy’s o’erlabour’d host.

Then to their prowess fell, by Paris’ hand
Menesthius, royal Areithous’ son,
Whom to the King, in Arna, where he dwelt,
The stag-ey’d dame Phylomedusa bore;
While Hector smote, with well-directed spear,
Beneath the brass-bound headpiece, through the throat,
Eioneus, and slack’d his limbs in death;
And Glaucus, leader of the Lycian bands,
Son of Hippolochus, amid the fray
Iphinous, son of Dexias, borne on high
By two fleet mares upon a lofty car,
Pierc’d through the shoulder; from the car he fell
Prone to the earth, his limbs relax’d in death.
But them when Pallas saw, amid the fray
Dealing destruction on the hosts of Greece,
From high Olympus to the walls of Troy
She came in haste; Apollo there she found,
As down he look’d from Ilium’s topmost tow’r,
Devising vict’ry to the arms of Troy.
Beside the oak they met; Apollo first,
The son of Jove, the colloquy began:
“Daughter of Jove, from great Olympus’ heights,
Why com’st thou here, by angry passion led?
Wouldst thou the vict’ry, swaying here and there,
Give to the Greeks? since pitiless thou see’st
The Trojans slaughter’d? Be advis’d by me,
For so ’twere better; cause we for today
The rage of battle and of war to cease;
To-morrow morn shall see the fight renew’d,
Until the close of Ilium’s destiny;
For so ye Goddesses have wrought your will,
That this fair city should in ruin fall.”

To whom the blue-ey’d Goddess thus replied:
“So be it, Archer-King; with like intent
I from Olympus came; but say, what means
Wilt thou devise to bid the conflict cease?”

To whom Apollo, royal son of Jove:
“The might of valiant Hector let us move
To challenge to the combat, man to man,
Some Grecian warrior; while the brass-clad Greeks
Their champion urge the challenge to accept,
And godlike Hector meet in single fight.”

He said; nor did Minerva not assent;
But Helenus, the son of Priam, knew
The secret counsel by the Gods devis’d;
And drawing near to Hector, thus he spoke:
“Hector, thou son of Priam, sage as Jove
In council, hearken to a brother’s words.
Bid that the Greeks and Trojans all sit down,
And thou defy the boldest of the Greeks
With thee in single combat to contend;
By revelation from th’ eternal Gods,
I know that here thou shalt not meet thy fate.”

He said, and Hector joy’d to hear his words;
Forth in the midst he stepp’d, and with his spear
Grasp’d in the middle, stay’d the Trojan ranks.
With one accord they sat; on th’ other side
Atrides bade the well-greav’d Greeks sit down;
While, in the likeness of two vultures, sat
On the tall oak of aegis-bearing Jove,
Pallas, and Phoebus of the silver bow,
With heroes’ deeds delighted; dense around
Bristled the ranks, with shield, and helm, and spear.
As when the west wind freshly blows, and brings
A dark’ning ripple o’er the ocean waves,
E’en so appear’d upon the plain the ranks
Of Greeks and Trojans; standing in the midst,
Thus to both armies noble Hector spoke:
“Hear, all ye Trojans, and ye well-greav’d Greeks,
The words I speak, the promptings of my soul.
It hath not pleas’d high-thron’d Saturnian Jove
To ratify our truce, who both afflicts
With labours hard, till either ye shall take
Our well-fenc’d city, or yourselves to us
Succumb beside your ocean-going ships.
Here have ye all the chiefest men of Greece;
Of all, let him who dares with me to fight,
Stand forth, and godlike Hector’s might confront.
And this I say, and call to witness Jove,
If with the sharp-edg’d spear he vanquish me,
He shall strip off, and to the hollow ships
In triumph bear my armour; but my corpse
Restore, that so the men and wives of Troy
May deck with honours due my funeral pyre.
But, by Apollo’s grace should I prevail,
I will his arms strip off and bear to Troy,
And in Apollo’s temple hang on high;
But to the ships his corpse I will restore,
That so the long-hair’d Greeks with solemn rites
May bury him, and to his mem’ry raise
By the broad Hellespont a lofty tomb;
And men in days to come shall say, who urge
Their full-oar’d bark across the dark-blue sea,
‘Lo there a warrior’s tomb of days gone by,
A mighty chief, whom glorious Hector slew:’
Thus shall they say, and thus my fame shall live.”

Thus Hector spoke; they all in silence heard,
Sham’d to refuse, but fearful to accept.
At length in anger Menelaus rose,
Groaning in spirit, and with bitter words
Reproach’d them: “Shame, ye braggart cowards, shame!
Women of Greece! I cannot call you men!
’Twere foul disgrace indeed, and scorn on scorn,
If Hector’s challenge none of all the Greeks
Should dare accept; to dust and water turn
All ye who here inglorious, heartless sit!
I will myself confront him; for success,
Th’ immortal Gods above the issues hold.”

Thus as he spoke, he donn’d his dazzling arms.
Then, Menelaus, had thine end approach’d
By Hector’s hands, so much the stronger he,
Had not the Kings withheld thee and restrain’d.
Great Agamemnon’s self, wide-ruling King,
Seizing his hand, address’d him thus by name:
“What! Heav’n-born Menelaus, art thou mad?
Beseems thee not such folly; curb thy wrath,
Though vex’d; nor think with Hector to contend,
Thy better far, inspiring dread in all.
From his encounter in the glorious fight,
Superior far to thee, Achilles shrinks;
But thou amid thy comrades’ ranks retire;
Some other champion will the Greeks provide;
And, fearless as he is, and of the fight
Insatiate, yet will Hector, should he ’scape
Unwounded from the deadly battle-strife,
Be fain, methinks, to rest his weary limbs.”

He said, and with judicious counsel sway’d
His brother’s mind; he yielded to his words,
And gladly his attendants doff’d his arms.

Then Nestor rose, and thus address’d the Greeks:
“Alas, alas! what shame is this for Greece!
What grief would fill the aged Peleus’ soul,
Sage chief in council, of the Myrmidons
Leader approv’d, who often in his house
Would question me, and lov’d from me to hear
Of all the Greeks the race and pedigree,
Could he but learn how Hector cow’d them all!
He to the Gods with hands uprais’d would pray
His soul might from his body be divorc’d,
And sink beneath the earth! Oh would to Jove,
To Pallas and Apollo, such were now
My vig’rous youth, as when beside the banks
Of swiftly-flowing Celadon, the men
Of Pylos with th’ Arcadian spearmen fought,
By Pheia’s walls, around Iardan’s streams.
Then from the ranks, in likeness as a God,
Advanc’d their champion, Ereuthalion bold.
The arms of Areithous he wore:
Of godlike Areithous, whom men
And richly-girdled women had surnam’d
The Macebearer; for not with sword or bow
He went to fight, but with an iron mace
Broke through the squadrons: him Lycurgus slew,
By stealth, not brav’ry, in a narrow way,
Where nought avail’d his iron mace from death
To save him; for Lycurgus, with his spear,
Preventing, thrust him through the midst; he fell
Prostrate; and from his breast the victor stripp’d
His armour off, the gift of brass-clad Mars;
And in the tug of war he wore it oft;
But when Lycurgus felt th’ approach of age,
He to his faithful follower and friend,
To Ereuthalion gave it; therewith, arm’d,
He now to combat challeng’d all the chiefs.
None dar’d accept, for fear had fallen on all;
Then I with dauntless spirit his might oppos’d,
The youngest of them all; with him I fought,
And Pallas gave the vict’ry to my arm.
Him there I slew, the tallest, strongest man;
For many another there beside him lay.
Would that my youth and strength were now the same;
Then soon should Hector of the glancing helm
A willing champion find; but ye, of Greece
The foremost men, with Hector fear to fight.”

The old man spoke reproachful; at his words
Up rose nine warriors: far before the rest,
The monarch Agamemnon, King of men;
Next Tydeus’ son, the valiant Diomed;
The two Ajaces, cloth’d with courage high;
Idomeneus, and of Idomeneus
The faithful follower, brave Meriones,
Equal in fight to blood-stain’d Mars; with these
Eurypylus, Euaemon’s noble son;
Thoas, Andraemon’s son; Ulysses last:
These all with Hector offer’d to contend.
Then thus again Gerenian Nestor spoke:
“Shake then the lots; on whomsoe’er it fall,
Great profit shall he bring to Grecian arms,
Great glory to himself, if he escape
Unwounded from the deadly battle strife.”
He said: each mark’d his sev’ral lot, and all
Together threw in Agamemnon’s helm.
The crowd, with hands uplifted, pray’d the Gods,
And looking heav’nward, said, “Grant, Father Jove,
The lot on Ajax, or on Tydeus’ son,
Or on Mycenæ’s wealthy King may fall.”

Thus they: then aged Nestor shook the helm,
And forth, according to their wish, was thrown
The lot of Ajax; then from left to right
A herald show’d to all the chiefs of Greece,
In turn, the token; they who knew it not,
Disclaim’d it all; but when to him he came
Who mark’d, and threw it in Atrides’ helm,
The noble Ajax, and, approaching, placed
The token in his outstretch’d hand, forthwith
He knew it, and rejoic’d; before his feet
He threw it down upon the ground, and said,
“O friends, the lot is mine; great is my joy,
And hope o’er godlike Hector to prevail.
But now, while I my warlike armour don,
Pray ye to Saturn’s royal son, apart,
In silence, that the Trojans hear ye not;
Or ev’n aloud, for nought have we to fear.
No man against my will can make me fly,
By greater force or skill; nor will, I hope,
My inexperience in the field disgrace
The teaching of my native Salamis.”

Thus he; and they to Saturn’s royal son
Address’d their pray’rs, and looking heav’nward, said:
“O Father Jove, who rul’st on Ida’s height!
Most great! most glorious! grant that Ajax now
May gain the vict’ry, and immortal praise:
Or if thy love and pity Hector claim,
Give equal pow’r and equal praise to both.”

Ajax meanwhile in dazzling brass was clad;
And when his armour all was duly donn’d,
Forward he mov’d, as when gigantic Mars
Leads nations forth to war, whom Saturn’s son
In life-destroying conflict hath involv’d;
So mov’d the giant Ajax, prop of Greece,
With sternly smiling mien; with haughty stride
He trod the plain, and pois’d his pond’rous spear.
The Greeks, rejoicing, on their champion gaz’d,
The Trojans’ limbs beneath them shook with fear;
Ev’n Hector’s heart beat quicker in his breast;
Yet quail he must not now, nor back retreat
Amid his comrades—he, the challenger!
Ajax approach’d; before him, as a tow’r
His mighty shield he bore, sev’n-fold, brass-bound,
The work of Tychius, best artificer
That wrought in leather; he in Hyla dwelt.
Of sev’n-fold hides the pond’rous shield was wrought
Of lusty bulls; the eighth was glitt’ring brass.
This by the son of Telamon was borne
Before his breast; to Hector close he came,
And thus with words of haughty menace spoke:

“Hector, I now shall teach thee, man to man,
The mettle of the chiefs we yet possess,
Although Achilles of the lion heart,
Mighty in battle, be not with us still;
He by his ocean-going ships indeed
Against Atrides nurses still his wrath;
Yet are there those who dare encounter thee,
And not a few; then now begin the fight.”

To whom great Hector of the glancing helm:
“Ajax, brave leader, son of Telamon,
Deal not with me as with a feeble child,
Or woman, ign’rant of the ways of war;
Of war and carnage every point I know;
And well I know to wield, now right, now left,
The tough bull’s-hide that forms my stubborn targe:
Well know I too my fiery steeds to urge,
And raise the war-cry in the standing fight.
But not in secret ambush would I watch,
To strike, by stealth, a noble foe like thee;
But slay thee, if I may, in open fight.”

He said; and, poising, hurl’d his pond’rous spear;
The brazen cov’ring of the shield it struck,
The outward fold, the eighth, above the sev’n
Of tough bull’s-hide; through six it drove its way
With stubborn force; but in the seventh was stay’d,
Then Ajax hurl’d in turn his pond’rous spear,
And struck the circle true of Hector’s shield;
Right thro’ the glitt’ring shield the stout spear pass’d,
And thro’ the well-wrought breastplate drove its way;
And, underneath, the linen vest it tore;
But Hector, stooping, shunn’d the stroke of death.
Withdrawing then their weapons, each on each
They fell, like lions fierce, or tusked boars,
In strength the mightiest of the forest beasts.
Then Hector fairly on the centre struck
The stubborn shield; yet drove not through the spear;
For the stout brass the blunted point repell’d.
But Ajax, with a forward bound, the shield
Of Hector pierc’d; right through the weapon pass’d;
Arrested with rude shock the warrior’s course,
And graz’d his neck, that spouted forth the blood.
Yet did not Hector of the glancing helm
Flinch from the contest: stooping to the ground,
With his broad hand a pond’rous stone he seiz’d,
That lay upon the plain, dark, jagg’d, and huge,
And hurl’d against the sev’n-fold shield, and struck
Full on the central boss; loud rang the brass:
Then Ajax rais’d a weightier mass of rock
And sent it whirling, giving to his arm
Unmeasur’d impulse; with a millstone’s weight
It crush’d the buckler; Hector’s knees gave way;
Backward he stagger’d, yet upon his shield
Sustain’d, till Phoebus rais’d him to his feet.
Now had they hand to hand with swords engag’d,
Had not the messengers of Gods and men,
The heralds, interpos’d; the one for Troy,
The other umpire for the brass-clad Greeks,
Talthybius and Idaeus, well approv’d.
Between the chiefs they held their wands, and thus
Idaeus both with prudent speech address’d:
“No more, brave youths! no longer wage the fight:
To cloud-compelling Jove ye both are dear,
Both valiant spearmen; that, we all have seen.
Night is at hand; behoves us yield to night.”

Whom answer’d thus the son of Telamon:
“Idaeus, bid that Hector speak those words:
He challeng’d all our chiefs; let him begin:
If he be willing, I shall not refuse.”

To whom great Hector of the glancing helm:
“Ajax, since God hath giv’n thee size, and strength,
And skill; and with the spear, of all the Greeks
None is thine equal; cease we for to-day
The fight; hereafter we may meet, and Heav’n
Decide our cause, and one with vict’ry crown.
Night is at hand; behoves us yield to night.
So by the ships shalt thou rejoice the Greeks,
And most of all, thy comrades and thy friends;
And so shall I, in Priam’s royal town,
Rejoice the men of Troy, and long-rob’d dames,
Who shall with grateful pray’rs the temples throng.
But make we now an interchange of gifts,
That both the Trojans and the Greeks may say,
‘On mortal quarrel did those warriors meet,
Yet parted thence in friendly bonds conjoin’d.’”

This said, a silver-studded sword he gave,
With scabbard and with well-cut belt complete;
Ajax a girdle, rich with crimson dye.
They parted; Ajax to the Grecian camp,
And Hector to the ranks of Troy return’d:
Great was the joy when him they saw approach,
Alive and safe; escap’d from Ajax’ might
And arm invincible; and tow’rd the town
They led him back, beyond their hope preserv’d;
While to Atrides’ tent the well-greav’d Greeks
Led Ajax, glorying in his triumph gain’d.

But when to Agamemnon’s tents they came,
The King of men to Saturn’s royal son
A bullock slew, a male of five years old;
The carcase then they flay’d; and cutting up,
Sever’d the joints; then fixing on the spits,
Roasted with care, and from the fire withdrew.
Their labours ended, and the feast prepar’d,
They shar’d the social meal, nor lack’d there aught.
To Ajax then the chine’s continuous length,
As honour’s meed, the mighty monarch gave.
The rage of thirst and hunger satisfied,
The aged Nestor first his mind disclos’d;
He who, before, the sagest counsel gave,
Now thus with prudent speech began, and said:
“Atrides, and ye other chiefs of Greece,
Since many a long-hair’d Greek hath fall’n in fight,
Whose blood, beside Scamander’s flowing stream,
Fierce Mars has shed, while to the viewless shades
Their spirits are gone, behoves thee with the morn
The warfare of the Greeks to intermit:
Then we, with oxen and with mules, the dead
From all the plain will draw; and, from the ships
A little space remov’d, will burn with fire:
That we, returning to our native land,
May to their children bear our comrades’ bones.
Then will we go, and on the plain erect
Around the pyre one common mound for all;
Then quickly build before it lofty tow’rs
To screen both ships and men; and in the tow’rs
Make ample portals, with well-fitting gates,
That through the midst a carriage-way may pass:
And a deep trench around it dig, to guard
Both men and chariots, lest on our defence
The haughty Trojans should too hardly press.”

He said; and all the Kings his words approv’d.
Meanwhile, on Ilium’s height, at Priam’s gate
The Trojan chiefs a troubled council held;
Which op’ning, thus the sage Antenor spoke:
“Hear now, ye Trojans, Dardans, and Allies,
The words I speak, the promptings of my soul.
Back to the sons of Atreus let us give
The Argive Helen, and the goods she brought;
For now in breach of plighted faith we fight:
Nor can I hope, unless to my advice
Ye listen, that success will crown our arms.”
Thus having said, he sat; and next arose
The godlike Paris, fair-hair’d Helen’s Lord;
Who thus with winged words the chiefs address’d:
“Hostile to me, Antenor, is thy speech;
Thy better judgment better counsel knows;
But if in earnest such is thine advice,
Thee of thy senses have the Gods bereft.
Now, Trojans, hear my answer; I reject
The counsel, nor the woman will restore;
But for the goods, whate’er I hither brought
To Troy from Argos, I am well content
To give them all, and others add beside.”

This said, he sat; and aged Priam next,
A God in council, Dardan’s son, arose,
Who thus with prudent speech began, and said:

“Hear now, ye Trojans, Dardans, and Allies,
The words I speak, the promptings of my soul:
Now through the city take your wonted meal;
Look to your watch, let each man keep his guard:
To-morrow shall Idaeus to the ships
Of Greece, to both the sons of Atreus, bear
The words of Paris, cause of all this war;
And ask besides, if from the deadly strife
Such truce they will accord us as may serve
To burn the dead; hereafter we may fight
Till Heav’n decide, and one with vict’ry crown.”

He said; and they, obedient to his word,
Throughout the ranks prepar’d the wonted meal:
But with the morning to the ships of Greece
Idaeus took his way: in council there
By Agamemnon’s leading ship he found
The Grecian chiefs, the ministers of Mars:
And ’mid them all the clear-voic’d herald spoke:

“Ye sons of Atreus, and ye chiefs of Greece,
From Priam, and the gallant sons of Troy,
I come, to bear, if ye be pleas’d to hear,
The words of Paris, cause of all this war:
The goods which hither in his hollow ships
(Would he had perish’d rather!) Paris brought,
He will restore, and others add beside;
But further says, the virgin-wedded wife
Of Menelaus, though the gen’ral voice
Of Troy should bid him. he will not restore:
Then bids me ask, if from the deadly strife
Such truce ye will accord us as may serve
To burn the dead: hereafter we may fight
Till Heav’n decide, and one with vict’ry crown.”

Thus he: they all in silence heard; at length
Uprose the valiant Diomed, and said;
“Let none from Paris now propose to accept
Or goods, or Helen’s self; a child may see
That now the doom of Troy is close at hand.”
He said; the sons of Greece, with loud applause,
The speech of valiant Diomed confirm’d.

Then to Idaeus Agamemnon thus:
“Idaeus, thou hast heard what answer give
The chiefs of Greece—their answer I approve.
But for the truce, for burial of the dead,
I nought demur; no shame it is to grace
With fun’ral rites the corpse of slaughter’d foes.
Be witness, Jove! and guard the plighted truce.”

He said: and heav’nward rais’d his staff; and back
To Ilium’s walls Idaeus took his way.
Trojans and Dardans there in council met
Expecting sat, till from the Grecian camp
Idaeus should return; he came, and stood
In mid assembly, and his message gave:
Then all in haste their sev’ral ways dispers’d,
For fuel some, and some to bring the dead.
The Greeks too from their well-mann’d ships went forth,
For fuel some, and some to bring the dead.
The sun was newly glancing on the earth.
From out the ocean’s smoothly-flowing depths
Climbing the Heav’ns, when on the plain they met.
Hard was it then to recognize the dead;
But when the gory dust was wash’d away,
Shedding hot tears, they plac’d them on the wains.
Nor loud lament, by Priam’s high command,
Was heard; in silence they, with grief suppress’d,
Heap’d up their dead upon the fun’ral pyre;
Then burnt with fire, and back return’d to Troy.
The well-greav’d Greeks, they too, with grief suppress’d,
Heap’d up their dead upon the fun’ral pyre;
Then burnt with fire, and to the ships return’d.

But ere ’twas morn, while daylight strove with night,
About the pyre a chosen band of Greeks
Had kept their vigil, and around it rais’d
Upon the plain one common mound for all;
And built in front a wall, with lofty tow’rs
To screen both ships and men; and in the tow’rs
Made ample portals with well-fitting gates,
That through the midst a carriage-way might pass:
Then dug a trench around it, deep and wide,
And in the trench a palisade they fix’d.

Thus labour’d thro’ the night the long-hair’d Greeks:
The Gods, assembled in the courts of Jove,
With wonder view’d the mighty work; and thus
Neptune, Earth-shaking King, his speech began:
“O Father Jove, in all the wide-spread earth
Shall men be found, in counsel and design
To rival us Immortals? see’st thou not
How round their ships the long-hair’d Greeks have built
A lofty wall, and dug a trench around,
Nor to the Gods have paid their off’rings due!
Wide as the light extends shall be the fame
Of this great work, and men shall lightly deem
Of that which I and Phoebus jointly rais’d,
With toil and pain, for great Laomedon.”

To whom in wrath the Cloud-compeller thus:
“Neptune, Earth-shaking King, what words are these?
This bold design to others of the Gods,
Of feebler hands, and pow’r less great than thine,
Might cause alarm; but, far as light extends,
Of this great work to thee shall be the fame:
When with their ships the long-hair’d Greeks shall take
Their homeward voyage to their native land,
This wall shall by the waves be broken through,
And sink, a shapeless ruin, in the sea:
O’er the wide shore again thy sands shall spread,
And all the boasted work of Greece o’erwhelm.”

Amid themselves such converse held the Gods.
The sun was set; the Grecian work was done;
They slew, and shar’d, by tents, the ev’ning meal.
From Lemnos’ isle a num’rous fleet had come
Freighted with wine; and by Euneus sent,
Whom fair Hypsipyle to Jason bore.
For Atreus’ sons, apart from all the rest,
Of wine, the son of Jason had despatch’d
A thousand measures; all the other Greeks
Hasten’d to purchase, some with brass, and some
With gleaming iron; other some with hides,
Cattle, or slaves; and joyous wax’d the feast.
All night the long-hair’d Greeks their revels held,
And so in Troy, the Trojans and Allies:
But through the night his anger Jove express’d
With awful thunderings; pale they turn’d with fear:
To earth the wine was from the goblets shed,
Nor dar’d they drink, until libations due
Had first been pour’d to Saturn’s mighty son.

Then lay they down, and sought the boon of sleep.




Now morn, in saffron robe, the earth o’erspread;
And Jove, the lightning’s Lord, of all the Gods
A council held upon the highest peak
Of many-ridg’d Olympus; he himself
Address’d them; they his speech attentive heard.

“Hear, all ye Gods, and all ye Goddesses,
The words I speak, the promptings of my soul.
Let none among you, male or female, dare
To thwart my counsels: rather all concur,
That so these matters I may soon conclude.
If, from the rest apart, one God I find
Presuming or to Trojans or to Greeks
To give his aid, with ignominious stripes
Back to Olympus shall that God be driv’n;
Or to the gloom of Tartarus profound,
Far off, the lowest abyss beneath the earth,
With, gates of iron, and with floor of brass,
Beneath the shades as far as earth from Heav’n,
There will I hurl him, and ye all shall know
In strength how greatly I surpass you all.
Make trial if ye will, that all may know.
A golden cord let down from Heav’n, and all,
Both Gods and Goddesses, your strength, apply:
Yet would ye fail to drag from Heav’n to earth,
Strive as ye may, your mighty master, Jove;
But if I choose to make my pow’r be known,
The earth itself, and ocean, I could raise,
And binding round Olympus’ ridge the cord,
Leave them suspended so in middle air:
So far supreme my pow’r o’er Gods and men.”

He said, and they, confounded by his words,
In silence sat; so sternly did he speak.
At length the blue-ey’d Goddess, Pallas, said:
“O Father, Son of Saturn, King of Kings,
Well do we know thy pow’r invincible;
Yet deeply grieve we for the warlike Greeks,
Condemn’d to hopeless ruin; from the fight,
Since such is thy command, we stand aloof;
But yet some saving counsel may we give,
Lest in thine anger thou destroy them quite.”

To whom the Cloud-compeller, smiling, thus:
“Be of good cheer, my child; unwillingly
I speak, yet will not thwart thee of thy wish.”

He said, and straight the brazen-footed steeds,
Of swiftest flight, with manes of flowing gold,
He harness’d to his chariot; all in gold
Himself array’d, the golden lash he grasp’d,
Of curious work; and mounting on his car,
Urg’d the fleet coursers; nothing loth, they flew
Midway betwixt the earth and starry heav’n.
To Ida’s spring-abounding hill he came,
And to the crest of Gargarus, wild nurse
Of mountain beasts; a sacred plot was there,
Whereon his incense-honour’d altar stood:
There stay’d his steeds the Sire of Gods and men
Loos’d from the car, and veil’d with clouds around.
Then on the topmost ridge he sat, in pride
Of conscious strength; and looking down, survey’d
The Trojan city, and the ships of Greece.

Meantime, the Greeks throughout their tents in haste
Despatch’d their meal, and arm’d them for the fight;
On th’ other side the Trojans donn’d their arms,
In numbers fewer, but with stern resolve,
By hard necessity constrain’d, to strive,
For wives and children, in the stubborn fight.
The gates all open’d wide, forth pour’d the crowd
Of horse and foot; and loud the clamour rose.
When in the midst they met, together rush’d
Bucklers and lances, and the furious might
Of mail-clad warriors; bossy shield on shield
Clatter’d in conflict; loud the clamour rose:
Then rose too mingled shouts and groans of men
Slaying and slain; the earth ran red with blood.
While yet ’twas morn, and wax’d the youthful day,
Thick flew the shafts, and fast the people fell
On either side; but when the sun had reach’d
The middle Heav’n, th’ Eternal Father hung
His golden scales aloft, and plac’d in each
The fatal death-lot: for the sons of Troy
The one, the other for the brass-clad Greeks;
Then held them by the midst; down sank the lot
Of Greece, down to the ground, while high aloft
Mounted the Trojan scale, and rose to Heav’n.[2]
Then loud he bade the volleying thunder peal
From Ida’s heights; and ’mid the Grecian ranks
He hurl’d his flashing lightning; at the sight
Amaz’d they stood, and pale with terror shook.

Then not Idomeneus, nor Atreus’ son,
The mighty Agamemnon, kept their ground,
Nor either Ajax, ministers of Mars;
Gerenian Nestor, aged prop of Greece,
Alone remain’d, and he against his will,
His horse sore wounded by an arrow shot
By godlike Paris, fair-hair’d Helen’s Lord:
Just on the crown, where close behind the head
First springs the mane, the deadliest spot of all,
The arrow struck him; madden’d with the pain
He rear’d, then plunging forward, with the shaft
Fix’d in his brain, and rolling in the dust,
The other steeds in dire confusion threw;
And while old Nestor with his sword essay’d
To cut the reins, and free the struggling horse,
Amid the rout down came the flying steeds
Of Hector, guided by no timid hand,
By Hector’s self; then had the old man paid
The forfeit of his life, but, good at need,
The valiant Diomed his peril saw,
And loudly shouting, on Ulysses call’d:
“Ulysses sage, Laertes’ godlike son,
Why fliest thou, coward-like, amid the throng,
And in thy flight to the aim of hostile spears
Thy back presenting? stay, and here with me
From this fierce warrior guard the good old man.”

He said; but stout Ulysses heard him not,
And to the ships pursued his hurried way.
But in the front, Tydides, though alone,
Remain’d undaunted; by old Nestor’s car
He stood, and thus the aged chief address’d:
“Old man, these youthful warriors press thee sore,
Thy vigour spent, and with the weight of years
Oppress’d; and helpless too thy charioteer,
And slow thy horses; mount my car, and prove
How swift my steeds, or in pursuit or flight,
From those of Tros descended, scour the plain;
My noble prize from great Æneas won.
Leave to th’ attendants these; while mine we launch
Against the Trojan host, that Hector’s self
May know how strong my hand can hurl the spear.”

He said; and Nestor his advice obey’d:
The two attendants, valiant Sthenelus,
And good Eurymedon, his horses took,
While on Tydides’ car they mounted both.
The aged Nestor took the glitt’ring reins,
And urg’d the horses; Hector soon they met:
As on he came, his spear Tydides threw,
Yet struck not Hector; but his charioteer,
Who held the reins, the brave Thebaeus’ son,
Eniopeus, through the breast transfix’d,
Beside the nipple; from the car he fell,
The startled horses swerving at the sound;
And from his limbs the vital spirit fled.
Deep, for his comrade slain, was Hector’s grief;
Yet him, though griev’d, perforce he left to seek
A charioteer; nor wanted long his steeds
A guiding hand; for Archeptolemus,
Brave son of Iphitus, he quickly found,
And bade him mount his swiftly-flying car,
And to his hands the glitt’ring reins transferr’d.

Then fearful ruin had been wrought, and deeds
Untold achiev’d, and like a flock of lambs,
The adverse hosts been coop’d beneath the walls,
Had not the Sire of Gods and men beheld,
And with an awful peal of thunder hurl’d
His vivid lightning down; the fiery bolt
Before Tydides’ chariot plough’d the ground.
Fierce flash’d the sulph’rous flame, and whirling round
Beneath the yoke th’ affrighted horses quailed.

From Nestor’s hand escap’d the glitt’ring reins,
And, trembling, thus to Diomed he spoke:

“Turn we to flight, Tydides; see’st thou not,
That Jove from us his aiding hand withholds?
This day to Hector Saturn’s son decrees
The meed of vict’ry; on some future day,
If so he will, the triumph may be ours;
For man, how brave soe’er, cannot o’errule
The will of Jove, so much the mightier he.”

Whom answer’d thus the valiant Diomed:
“Truly, old man, and wisely dost thou speak;
But this the bitter grief that wrings my soul:
Some day, amid the councillors of Troy
Hector may say, ‘Before my presence scar’d
Tydides sought the shelter of the ships.’
Thus when he boasts, gape earth, and hide my shame!”

To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied:
“Great son of Tydeus, oh what words are these!
Should Hector brand thee with a coward’s name,
No credence would he gain from Trojan men,
Or Dardan, or from Trojan warriors’ wives,
Whose husbands in the dust thy hand hath laid.”

He said, and ’mid the general rout, to flight
He turn’d his horses; on the flying crowd,
With shouts of triumph, Hector at their head,
The men of Troy their murd’rous weapons show’r’d.
Loud shouted Hector of the glancing helm:
“Tydides, heretofore the warrior Greeks
Have held thee in much honour; plac’d on high
At banquets, and with lib’ral portions grac’d,
And flowing cups: but thou, from this day forth,
Shalt be their scorn! a woman’s soul is thine!
Out on thee, frighten’d girl! thou ne’er shalt scale
Our Trojan tow’rs, and see me basely fly;
Nor in thy ships our women bear away:
Ere such thy boast, my hand shall work thy doom.”

Thus he; and greatly was Tydides mov’d
To turn his horses, and confront his foe:
Thrice thus he doubted; thrice, at Jove’s command,
From Ida’s height the thunder peal’d, in sign
Of vict’ry swaying to the Trojan side.
Then to the Trojans Hector call’d aloud:
“Trojans, and Lycians, and ye Dardans, fam’d
In close encounter, quit ye now like men;
Put forth your wonted valour; for I know
That in his secret counsels Jove designs
Glory to me, disaster to the Greeks.
Fools, in those wretched walls that put their trust,
Scarce worthy notice, hopeless to withstand
My onset; and the trench that they have dug,
Our horses easily can overleap;
And when I reach the ships, be mindful ye,
To have at hand the fire, wherewith the ships
We may destroy, while they themselves shall fall
An easy prey, bewilder’d by the smoke.”

He said, and thus with cheering words address’d
His horses: “Xanthus, and, Podargus, thou,
Æthon and Lampus, now repay the care
On you bestow’d by fair Andromache,
Eetion’s royal daughter; bear in mind
How she with ample store of provender
Your mangers still supplied, before e’en I,
Her husband, from her hands the wine-cup took.
Put forth your speed, that we may make our prize
Of Nestor’s shield, whose praise extends to Heav’n,
Its handles, and itself, of solid gold;
And from the shoulders of Tydides strip
His gorgeous breastplate, work of Vulcan’s hand:
These could we take, methinks this very night
Would see the Greeks embarking on their ships.”

Such was his pray’r; but Juno on her throne
Trembled with rage, till great Olympus quak’d,
And thus to Neptune, mighty God, she spoke:
“O thou of boundless might, Earth-shaking God,
See’st thou unmov’d the ruin of the Greeks?
Yet they in Ægae and in Helice,
With grateful off’rings rich thine altars crown;
Then give we them the vict’ry; if we all
Who favour Greece, together should combine
To put to flight the Trojans, and restrain
All-seeing Jove, he might be left alone,
On Ida’s summit to digest his wrath.”

To whom, in anger, Neptune thus replied:
“O Juno, rash of speech, what words are these!
I dare not counsel that we all should join
’Gainst Saturn’s son; so much the stronger he.”

Such converse held they; all the space meanwhile
Within the trench, between the tow’r and ships,
Was closely throng’d with steeds and buckler’d men;
By noble Hector, brave as Mars, and led
By Jove to vict’ry, coop’d in narrow space;
Who now had burnt with fire the Grecian ships,
But Juno bade Atrides haste to rouse
Their fainting courage; through the camp he pass’d;
On his broad hand a purple robe he bore,
And stood upon Ulysses’ lofty ship,
The midmost, whence to shout to either side,
Or to the tents of Ajax Telamon,
Or of Achilles, who at each extreme,
Confiding in their strength, had moor’d their ships.

Thence to the Greeks he shouted, loud and clear:
“Shame on ye, Greeks, base cowards, brave alone
In outward semblance! where are now the vaunts
Which once (so highly of ourselves we deem’d)
Ye made, vain-glorious braggarts as ye were,
In Lemnos’ isle, when, feasting on the flesh
Of straight-horn’d oxen, and your flowing cups
Crowning with ruddy wine, not one of you,
But for a hundred Trojans in the field,
Or for two hundred, deem’d himself a match:
Now quail ye all before a single man,
Hector, who soon will wrap our ships in fire.
O Father Jove! what sov’reign e’er hast thou
So far deluded, of such glory robb’d?
Yet ne’er, on this disastrous voyage bent,
Have I unheeded pass’d thine altar by;
The choicest off’rings burning still on each,
In hopes to raze the well-built walls of Troy.
Yet to this pray’r at least thine ear incline;
Grant that this coast in safety we may leave,
Nor be by Trojans utterly subdued.”

He said; and Jove, with pity, saw his tears;
And, with a sign, his people’s safety vouch’d.
He sent an eagle, noblest bird that flies,
Who in his talons bore a wild deer’s fawn:
The fawn he dropp’d beside the holy shrine,
Where to the Lord of divination, Jove,
The Greeks were wont their solemn rites to pay.
The sign from Heav’n they knew; with courage fresh
Assail’d the Trojans, and the fight renew’d.
Then none of all the many Greeks might boast
That he, before Tydides, drove his car
Across the ditch, and mingled in the fight.
His was the hand that first a crested chief,
The son of Phradmon, Agelaus, struck.
He turn’d his car for flight; but as he turn’d,
The lance of Diomed, behind his neck,
Between the shoulders, through his chest was driv’n;
Headlong he fell, and loud his armour rang.

Next to Tydides, Agamemnon came,
And Menelaus, Atreus’ godlike sons;
Th’ Ajaces both, in dauntless courage cloth’d;
Idomeneus, with whom Meriones,
His faithful comrade, terrible as Mars;
Eurypylus, Euaemon’s noble son;
The ninth was Teucer, who, with bended bow,
Behind the shield of Ajax Telamon
Took shelter; Ajax o’er him held his shield;
Thence look’d he round, and aim’d amid the crowd;
And as he saw each Trojan, wounded, fall,
Struck by his shafts, to Ajax close he press’d,
As to its mother’s shelt’ring arms a child,
Conceal’d and safe beneath the ample targe.

Say then, who first of all the Trojans fell
By Teucer’s arrows slain? Orsilochus,
And Ophelestes, Daetor, Ormenus,
And godlike Lycophontes, Chromius,
And Amopaon, Polyaemon’s son,
And valiant Melanippus: all of these,
Each after other, Teucer laid in dust.
Him Agamemnon, with his well-strung bow
Thinning the Trojan ranks, with joy beheld,
And, standing at his side, address’d him thus:
“Teucer, good comrade, son of Telamon,
Shoot ever thus, if thou wouldst be the light
And glory of the Greeks, and of thy sire,
Who nursed thine infancy, and in his house
Maintain’d, though bastard; him, though distant far,
To highest fame let thine achievements raise.
This too I say, and will make good my word:
If by the grace of aegis-bearing Jove,
And Pallas, Ilium’s well-built walls we raze,
A gift of honour, second but to mine,
I in thy hands will place; a tripod bright,
Or, with their car and harness, two brave steeds,
Or a fair woman who thy bed may share.”

To whom in answer valiant Teucer thus:
“Most mighty son of Atreus, why excite
Who lacks not zeal? To th’ utmost of my pow’r
Since first we drove the Trojans back, I watch,
Unceasing, every chance to ply my shafts.
Eight barbed arrows have I shot e’en now,
And in a warrior each has found its mark;
That savage hound alone defeats my aim.”

At Hector, as he spoke, another shaft
He shot, ambitious of so great a prize:
He miss’d his aim; but Priam’s noble son
Gorgythion, through the breast his arrow struck,
Whom from Æsyme brought, a wedded bride
Of heavenly beauty, Castianeira bore.
Down sank his head, as in a garden sinks
A ripen’d poppy charg’d with vernal rains;
So sank his head beneath his helmet’s weight.
At Hector yet another arrow shot
Teucer, ambitious of so great a prize;
Yet this too miss’d, by Phoebus turn’d aside;
But Archeptolemus, the charioteer
Of Hector, onward hurrying, through the breast
It struck, beside the nipple; from the car
He fell; aside the startled horses swerv’d;
And as he fell the vital spirit fled.
Deep, for his comrade slain, was Hector’s grief;
Yet him, though griev’d at heart, perforce he left,
And to Cebriones, his brother, call’d,
Then near at hand, the horses’ reins to take;
He heard, and straight obey’d; then Hector leap’d
Down from his glitt’ring chariot to the ground,
His fearful war-cry shouting; in his hand
A pond’rous stone he carried; and, intent
To strike him down, at Teucer straight he rush’d.
He from his quiver chose a shaft in haste,
And fitted to the cord; but as he drew
The sinew, Hector of the glancing helm
Hurl’d the huge mass of rock, which Teucer struck
Near to the shoulder, where the collar-bone
Joins neck and breast, the spot most opportune,
And broke the tendon; paralys’d, his arm
Dropp’d helpless by his side; upon his knees
He fell, and from his hands let fall the bow.
Not careless Ajax saw his brother’s fall,
But o’er him spread in haste his cov’ring shield.
Two faithful friends, Mecisteus, Echius’ son,
And brave Alastor, from the press withdrew,
And bore him, deeply groaning, to the ships.

Then Jove again the Trojan courage fir’d,
And backward to the ditch they forc’d the Greeks.
Proud of his prowess, Hector led them on;
And as a hound that, fleet of foot, o’ertakes
Or boar or lion, object of his chase,
Springs from behind, and fastens on his flank,
Yet careful watches, lest he turn to bay:
So Hector press’d upon the long-hair’d Greeks,
Slaying the hindmost; they in terror fled.
But, pass’d at length the ditch and palisade,
With loss of many by the Trojans slain,
Before the ships they rallied from their flight,
And one to other call’d: and one and all
With hands uplifted, pray’d to all the Gods;
While Hector, here and there, on ev’ry side
His flying coursers wheel’d, with eyes that flash’d
Awful as Gorgon’s, or as blood-stain’d Mars.

Juno, the white-arm’d Queen, with pity mov’d,
To Pallas thus her winged words address’d:
“O Heav’n, brave child of aegis-bearing Jove,
Can we, ev’n now, in this their sorest need,
Refuse the Greeks our aid, by one subdued,
One single man, of pride unbearable,
Hector, the son of Priam, who e’en now,
Hath caus’d them endless grief?” To whom again
The blue-ey’d Goddess, Pallas, thus replied:
“I too would fain behold him robb’d of life,
In his own country slain by Grecian hands;
But that my sire, by ill advice misled,
Rages in wrath, still thwarting all my plans;
Forgetting now how oft his son I sav’d,
Sore wearied with the toils Eurystheus gave.
Oft would his tears ascend to Heav’n, and oft
From Heav’n would Jove despatch me to his aid;
But if I then had known what now I know,
When to the narrow gates of Pluto’s realm
He sent him forth to bring from Erebus
Its guardian dog, he never had return’d
In safety from the marge of Styx profound.
He holds me now in hatred, and his ear
To Thetis lends, who kiss’d his knees, and touch’d
His beard, and pray’d him to avenge her son
Achilles; yet the time shall come when I
Shall be once more his own dear blue-ey’d Maid.
But haste thee now, prepare for us thy car,
While to the house of aegis-bearing Jove
I go, and don my armour for the fight,
To prove if Hector of the glancing helm,
The son of Priam, will unmov’d behold
Us two advancing o’er the pass of war;
Or if the flesh of Trojans, slain by Greeks,
Shall sate the maw of rav’ning dogs and birds.”

She said: the white-arm’d Queen her word obey’d.
Juno, great Goddess, royal Saturn’s child,
The horses brought, with golden frontlets crown’d;
While Pallas, child of aegis-bearing Jove,
Within her father’s threshold dropp’d her veil
Of airy texture, work of her own hands;
The cuirass donn’d of cloud-compelling Jove,
And stood accoutred for the bloody fray.
The fiery car she mounted; in her hand
A spear she bore, long, weighty, tough; wherewith
The mighty daughter of a mighty sire
Sweeps down the ranks of those her wrath pursues.
Then Juno sharply touch’d the flying steeds;
Forthwith spontaneous opening, grated harsh
The heavenly portals, guarded by the Hours,
Who Heav’n and high Olympus have in charge,
To roll aside or close the veil of cloud;
Through these th’ excited horses held their way.

From Ida’s heights the son of Saturn saw,
And, fill’d with wrath, the heav’nly messenger,
The golden-winged Iris, thus bespoke:
“Haste thee, swift Iris; turn them back, and warn
That farther they advance not: ’tis not meet
That they and I in war should be oppos’d.
This too I say, and will make good my words:
Their flying horses I will lame; themselves
Dash from their car, and break their chariot-wheels;
And ten revolving years heal not the wound
Where strikes my lightning; so shall Pallas learn
What ’tis against her father to contend.
Juno less moves my wonder and my wrath;
Whate’er I plan, ’tis still her wont to thwart.”
Thus he: from Ida to Olympus’ height
The storm-swift Iris on her errand sped.
At many-ridg’d Olympus’ outer gate
She met the Goddesses, and stay’d their course,
And thus convey’d the sov’reign will of Jove:

“Whither away? what madness fills your breasts?
To give the Greeks your succour, Jove forbids;
And thus he threatens, and will make it good:
Your flying horses he will lame; yourselves
Dash from the car, and break your chariot-wheels;
And ten revolving years heal not the wounds
His lightning makes: so, Pallas, shalt thou learn
What ’tis against thy father to contend.
Juno less moves his wonder and his wrath;
Whate’er he plans, ’tis still her wont to thwart;
But over-bold and void of shame art thou,
If against Jove thou dare to lift thy spear.”

Thus as she spoke, swift Iris disappear’d.
Then Juno thus to Pallas spoke: “No more,
Daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, can we
For mortal men his sov’reign will resist;
Live they or die, as each man’s fate may be;
While he, ’twixt Greeks and Trojans, as ’tis meet,
His own designs accomplishing, decides.”
She said, and backward turn’d her horses’ heads.
The horses from the car the Hours unyok’d,
And safely tether’d in the heav’nly stalls;
The car they rear’d against the inner wall,
That brightly polish’d shone; the Goddesses
Themselves meanwhile, amid th’ Immortals all,
With, sorrowing hearts on golden seats reclin’d.

Ere long, on swiftly-rolling chariot borne,
Jove to Olympus, to th’ abode of Gods,
From Ida’s height return’d: th’ earth-shaking God,
Neptune, unyok’d his steeds; and on the stand
Secur’d the car, and spread the cov’ring o’er.
Then on his golden throne all-seeing Jove
Sat down; beneath his feet Olympus shook.
Juno and Pallas only sat aloof;
No word they utter’d, no enquiry made.
Jove knew their thoughts, and thus address’d them both:
“Pallas and Juno, wherefore sit ye thus
In angry silence? In the glorious fight
No lengthen’d toil have ye sustain’d, to slay
The Trojans, whom your deadly hate pursues.
Not all the Gods that on Olympus dwell
Could turn me from my purpose, such my might,
And such the pow’r of my resistless hand;
But ye were struck with terror ere ye saw
The battle-field, and fearful deeds of war.
But this I say, and bear it in your minds,
Had I my lightning launch’d, and from your car
Had hurl’d ye down, ye ne’er had reach’d again
Olympus’ height, th’ immortal Gods’ abode.”

So spoke the God; but, seated side by side,
Juno and Pallas glances interchang’d
Of ill portent for Troy; Pallas indeed
Sat silent, and, though inly wroth with Jove,
Yet answer’d not a word; but Juno’s breast
Could not contain her rage, and thus she spoke:
“What words, dread son of Saturn, dost thou speak?
Well do we know thy pow’r invincible,
Yet deeply grieve we for the warlike Greeks,
Condemn’d to hopeless ruin: from the fight,
Since such is thy command, we stand aloof;
But yet some saving counsel may we give,
Lest in thine anger thou destroy them quite.”

To whom the Cloud-compeller thus replied:
“Yet greater slaughter, stag-ey’d Queen of Heav’n,
To-morrow shalt thou see, if so thou list,
Wrought on the warrior Greeks by Saturn’s son;
For Hector’s proud career shall not be check’d
Until the wrath of Peleus’ godlike son
Beside the ships be kindled, in the day
When round Patroclus’ corpse, in narrow space,
E’en by the vessels’ sterns, the war shall rage.
Such is the voice of destiny: for thee,
I reck not of thy wrath; nor should I care
Though thou wert thrust beneath the lowest deep
Of earth and ocean, where Iapetus
And Saturn lie, uncheer’d by ray of sun
Or breath of air, in Tartarus profound.
Though there thou wert to banishment consign’d,
I should not heed, but thy reproaches hear
Unmov’d; for viler thing is none than thou.”
He said, but white-arm’d Juno answer’d not.

The sun, now sunk beneath the ocean wave,
Drew o’er the teeming earth the veil of night.
The Trojans saw, reluctant, day’s decline;
But on the Greeks thrice welcome, thrice invoked
With earnest prayers, the shades of darkness fell.

The noble Hector then to council call’d
The Trojan leaders; from the ships apart
He led them, by the eddying river’s side,
To a clear space of ground, from corpses free.
They from their cars dismounting, to the words
Of godlike Hector listen’d: in his hand
His massive spear he held, twelve cubits long,
Whose glitt’ring point flash’d bright, with hoop of gold
Encircled round; on this he leant, and said,
“Hear me, ye Trojans, Dardans, and Allies;
I hop’d that to the breezy heights of Troy
We might ere now in triumph have return’d,
The Grecian ships and all the Greeks destroy’d:
But night hath come too soon, and sav’d awhile
The Grecian army and their stranded ships.
Then yield we to the night; prepare the meal;
Unyoke your horses, and before them place
Their needful forage; from the city bring
Oxen and sheep; the luscious wine provide;
Bring bread from out our houses; and collect
Good store of fuel, that the livelong night,
E’en till the dawn of day, may broadly blaze
Our num’rous watchfires, and illume the Heav’ns;
Lest, e’en by night, the long-hair’d Greeks should seek
O’er the broad bosom of the sea to fly,
That so not unassail’d they may embark,
Nor undisturb’d; but haply some may bear,
E’en to their homes, the mem’ry of a wound
Receiv’d from spear or arrow, as on board
They leap’d in haste; and others too may fear
To tempt with hostile arms the pow’r of Troy.
Then let the sacred heralds’ voice proclaim
Throughout the city, that the stripling youths
And hoary-headed sires allot themselves
In sev’ral watches to the Heav’n-built tow’rs.
Charge too the women, in their houses each,
To kindle blazing fires; let careful watch
Be set, lest, in the absence of the men,
The town by secret ambush be surpris’d.
Such, valiant Trojans, is th’ advice I give;
And what to-night your wisdom shall approve
Will I, at morn, before the Trojans speak.
Hopeful, to Jove I pray, and all the Gods,
To chase from hence these fate-inflicted hounds,
By fate sent hither on their dark-ribb’d ships.
Now keep we through the night our watchful guard;
And with the early dawn, equipp’d in arms,
Upon their fleet our angry battle pour.
Then shall I know if Tydeus’ valiant son
Back from the ships shall drive me to the walls,
Or I, triumphant, bear his bloody spoils:
To-morrow morn his courage will decide,
If he indeed my onset will await.
But ere to-morrow’s sun be high in Heav’n,
He, ’mid the foremost, if I augur right,
Wounded and bleeding in the dust shall lie,
And many a comrade round him. Would to Heav’n
I were as sure to be from age and death
Exempt, and held in honour as a God,
Phoebus, or Pallas, as I am assur’d
The coming day is fraught with ill to Greece.”

Thus Hector spoke; the Trojans shouted loud:
Then from the yoke the sweating steeds they loos’d,
And tether’d each beside their sev’ral cars:
Next from the city speedily they brought
Oxen and sheep; the luscious wine procur’d;
Brought bread from out their houses, and good store
Of fuel gather’d; wafted from the plain,
The winds to Heav’n the sav’ry odours bore.
Full of proud hopes, upon the pass of war,
All night they camp’d; and frequent blaz’d their fires.

As when in Heav’n, around the glitt’ring moon
The stars shine bright amid the breathless air;
And ev’ry crag, and ev’ry jutting peak
Stands boldly forth, and ev’ry forest glade;
Ev’n to the gates of Heav’n is open’d wide
The boundless sky; shines each particular star
Distinct; joy fills the gazing shepherd’s heart.
So bright, so thickly scatter’d o’er the plain,
Before the walls of Troy, between the ships
And Xanthus’ stream, the Trojan watchfires blaz’d.

A thousand fires burnt brightly; and round each
Sat fifty warriors in the ruddy glare;
Champing the provender before them laid,
Barley and rye, the tether’d horses stood
Beside the cars, and waited for the morn.





Thus kept their watch, the Trojans; but the Greeks
Dire Panic held, companion of chill Fear,
Their bravest struck with grief unbearable.
As when two stormy winds ruffle the sea,
Boreas and Zephyr, from the hills of Thrace
With sudden gust descending; the dark waves
Rear high their angry crests, and toss on shore
Masses of tangled weed; such stormy grief
The breast of ev’ry Grecian warrior rent.

Atrides, heart-struck, wander’d to and fro,
And to the clear-voic’d heralds gave command
To call, but not with proclamation loud,
Each sev’ral man to council; he himself
Spar’d not his labour, mixing with the chiefs.
Sadly they sat in council; Atreus’ son,
Weeping, arose; as some dark-water’d fount
Pours o’er a craggy steep its gloomy stream;
Then with deep groans th’ assembled Greeks address’d:
“O friends! the chiefs and councillors of Greece,
Grievous, and all unlook’d for, is the blow
Which Jove hath dealt me; by his promise led
I hop’d to raze the strong-built walls of Troy,
And home return in safety; but it seems
He falsifies his word, and bids me now
Return to Argos, frustrate of my hope,
Dishonour’d, and with grievous loss of men.
Such now appears th’ o’er-ruling sov’reign will
Of Saturn’s son, who oft hath sunk the heads
Of many a lofty city in the dust,
And yet will sink; for mighty is his hand.
Hear then my counsel; let us all agree
Home to direct our course: since here in vain
We strive to take the well-built walls of Troy.”

The monarch spoke; they all in silence heard:
In speechless sorrow long they sat: at length
Rose valiant Diomed, and thus he spoke:
“Atrides, I thy folly must confront,
As is my right, in council: thou, O King!
Be not offended: once, among the Greeks
Thou heldest light my prowess, with the name
Of coward branding me; how justly so
Is known to all the Greeks, both young and old.
On thee the deep-designing Saturn’s son
In diff’ring measure hath his gifts bestow’d:
A throne he gives thee, higher far than all;
But valour, noblest boon of Heav’n, denies.
How canst thou hope the sons of Greece shall prove
Such heartless dastards as thy words suppose?
If homeward to return thy mind be fix’d,
Depart; the way is open, and the ships,
Which from Mycenæ follow’d thee in crowds,
Are close at hand, and ready to be launch’d.
Yet will the other long-hair’d Greeks remain
Till Priam’s city fall: nay, though the rest
Betake them to their ships, and sail for home,
Yet I and Sthenelus, we two, will fight
Till Troy be ours; for Heav’n is on our side.”

Thus he; the sons of Greece, with loud applause,
The speech of valiant Diomed confirm’d.

Then aged Nestor rose, and thus began:
“Tydides, eminent thou art in war;
And In the council thy compeers in age
Must yield to thee; thy present words, no Greek
Can censure, or gainsay; and yet the end
Thou hast not reach’d, and object of debate.
But thou art young, and for thine age mightst be
My latest born; yet dost thou to the Kings
Sage counsel give, and well in season speak.
But now will I, that am thine elder far,
Go fully through the whole; and none my words
May disregard, not ev’n Atrides’ self.
Outcast from kindred, law, and hearth is he
Whose soul delights in fierce internal strife.
But yield we now to th’ influence of night:
Prepare the meal; and let the sev’ral guards
Be posted by the ditch, without the wall.
This duty on the younger men I lay:
Then, Agamemnon, thou thy part perform;
For thou art King supreme; the Elders all,
As meet and seemly, to the feast invite:
Thy tents are full of wine, which Grecian ships
O’er the wide sea bring day by day from Thrace;
Nor lack’st thou aught thy guests to entertain,
And many own thy sway; when all are met,
His counsel take, who gives the best advice;
Great need we have of counsel wise and good,
When close beside our ships the hostile fires
Are burning: who can this unmov’d behold?
This night our ruin or our safety sees.”

He said; and they, assenting, heard his speech.
Forth with their followers went th’ appointed guards,
The princely Thrasymedes, Nestor’s son,
Ascalaphus, and bold Ialmenus,
Two valiant sons of Mars; Meriones,
And Aphareus, and brave Deipyrus,
And godlike Lycomedes, Creon’s son.
Sev’n were the leaders; and with each went forth
A hundred gallant youths, with lances arm’d.
Between the ditch and wall they took their post;
There lit their fires, and there the meal prepar’d.

Then for th’ assembled Elders in his tent
An ample banquet Agamemnon spread;
They on the viands, set before them, fell:
The rage of thirst and hunger satisfied,
The aged Nestor first his mind disclos’d
He who, before, the sagest counsel gave,
Now thus with prudent words began, and said:

“Most mighty Agamemnon, King of men,
With thee, Atrides, my discourse shall end,
With thee begin: o’er many nations thou
Hold’st sov’reign sway; since Jove to thee hath giv’n
The sceptre, and the high prerogative,
To be thy people’s judge and counsellor,
’Tis thine to speak the word, ’tis thine to hear
And to determine, when some other chief
Suggestions offers in the gen’ral cause:
What counsel shall prevail, depends on thee:
Yet will I say what seems to me the best.
Sounder opinion none can hold than this,
Which I maintain, and ever have maintain’d,
Ev’n from the day when thou, great King, didst bear
The fair Briseis from Achilles’ tent
Despite his anger—not by my advice:
I fain would have dissuaded thee, but thou,
Following the dictates of thy wrathful pride,
Didst to our bravest wrong, dishon’ring him
Whom ev’n th’ Immortals honour’d; for his prize
Thou took’st and still retain’st; but let us now
Consider, if ev’n yet, with costly gifts
And soothing words, we may his wrath appease.”

To whom the monarch Agamemnon thus:
“Father, too truly thou recall’st my fault:
I err’d, nor will deny it; as a host
Is he whom Jove in honour holds, as now
Achilles hon’ring, he confounds the Greeks,
But if I err’d, by evil impulse led,
Fain would I now conciliate him, and pay
An ample penalty; before you all
I pledge myself rich presents to bestow.
Sev’n tripods will I give, untouch’d by fire;
Of gold, ten talents, twenty caldrons bright,
Twelve pow’rful horses, on the course renown’d,
Who by their speed have many prizes won.
Not empty-handed could that man be deem’d,
Nor poor in gold, who but so much possess’d
As by those horses has for me been won.
Sev’n women too, well skill’d in household cares,
Lesbians, whom I selected for myself,
That day he captur’d Lesbos’ goodly isle,
In beauty far surpassing all their sex:
These will I give; and with them will I send
The fair Briseis, her whom from his tent
I bore away; and add a solemn oath,
I ne’er approach’d her bed, nor held with her
Such intercourse as man with woman holds.
All these shall now be his: but if the Gods
Shall grant us Priam’s city to destroy,
Of gold and brass, when we divide the spoil,
With countless heaps he shall a vessel freight,
And twenty captives he himself shall choose,
All only less than Argive Helen fair.
And if it be our fate to see again
The teeming soil of Argos, he shall be
My son by marriage; and in honour held
As is Orestes, who, my only son,
Is rear’d at home in luxury and ease.
Three daughters fair I have, Chrysothemis,
Iphianassa, and Laodice;
Of these, whiche’er he will, to Peleus’ house,
No portion ask’d for, he shall take to wife;
And with her will I add such wedding gifts,
As never man before to daughter gave.
Sev’n prosp’rous towns besides; Cardamyle,
And Enope, and Ira’s grassy plains;
And Pherae, and Antheia’s pastures deep,
Æpeia fair, and vine-clad Pedasus;
All by the sea, by sandy Pylos’ bounds.
The dwellers there in flocks and herds are rich,
And, as a God, shall honour him with gifts,
And to his sceptre ample tribute pay.
This will I do, so he his wrath remit:
Then let him yield (Pluto alone remains
Unbending and inexorable; and thence
Of all the Gods is most abhorr’d of men),
To me submitting, as in royal pow’r
Superior far, and more advanc’d in age.”

To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied:
“Most mighty Agamemnon, King of men,
Atrides, not unworthy are the gifts,
Which to Achilles thou design’st to send:
Then to the tent of Peleus’ son in haste
Let us our chosen messengers despatch:
Whom I shall choose, let them consent to go.
Then first of all let Phoenix lead the way,
Beloved of Jove; the mighty Ajax next:
With them, Ulysses sage; and let them take,
Of heralds, Hodius and Eurybates.
Bring now the hallowing water for our hands;
And bid be silent, while to Saturn’s son,
That he have mercy, we address our pray’r.”

He said, and well his counsel pleas’d them all;
The heralds pour’d the water on their hands;
The youths, attending, crown’d the bowls with wine,
And in due order serv’d the cups to all.
Then, their libations made, when each with wine
Had satisfied his soul, from out the tent
Of Agamemnon, Atreus’ son, they pass’d;
And many a caution aged Nestor gave,
With rapid glance to each, Ulysses chief,
How best to soften Peleus’ matchless son.

Beside the many-dashing ocean’s shore
They mov’d along; and many a pray’r address’d
To Neptune, Ocean’s Earth-surrounding God,
That he to gentle counsels would incline
The haughty soul of great Æacides.
When to the ships and tents they came, where lay
The warlike Myrmidons, their chief they found
His spirit soothing with a sweet-ton’d lyre,
Of curious work, with silver band adorn’d;
Part of the spoil he took, when he destroy’d
Eetion’s wealthy town; on this he play’d,
Soothing his soul, and sang of warriors’ deeds.
Before the chief, in silence and alone
Patroclus sat, upon Achilles fix’d
His eyes, awaiting till the song should cease.
The envoys forward stepp’d, Ulysses first,
And stood before him; from his couch, amaz’d,
And holding still his lyre, Achilles sprang,
Leaving the seat whereon they found him plac’d;
And at their entrance rose Patroclus too:
Waving his hand, Achilles, swift of foot,
Addressed them: “Welcome, friends! as friends ye come:
Some great occasion surely to my tent
Hath brought the men who are, of all the Greeks,
Despite my anger, dearest to my heart.”

Thus as he spoke, he led them in, and plac’d
On couches spread with, purple carpets o’er,
Then thus address’d Patroclus at his side:
“Son of Menoetius, set upon the board
A larger bowl, and stronger mix the wine,
And serve a cup to each: beneath my roof
This night my dearest friends I entertain.”
He said; Patroclus his commands obey’d;
And in the fire-light plac’d an ample tray,
And on it laid of goat’s flesh and of sheep’s
A saddle each; and with them, rich in fat,
A chine of well-fed hog; Automedon
Held fast, while great Achilles carv’d the joints.
The meat, prepar’d, he fix’d upon the spits:
Patroclus kindled then a blazing fire;
And when the fire burnt hotly, and the flame
Subsided, spread the glowing embers out,
And hung the spits above; then sprinkled o’er
The meat with salt, and lifted from the stand.
The viands cook’d and plac’d upon the board,
From baskets fair Patroclus portion’d out
The bread to each; the meat Achilles shar’d.
Facing the sage Ulysses, sat the host
On th’ other side the tent; and bade his friend,
Patroclus, give the Gods their honours due:
He in the fire the wonted off’rings burnt:
They on the viands set before them fell.
The rage of thirst and hunger satisfied,
Ajax to Phoenix sign’d: Ulysses saw
The sign, and rising, fill’d a cup with wine,
And pledg’d Achilles thus: “To thee I drink,
Achilles! nobly is thy table spread,
As heretofore in Agamemnon’s tent,
So now in thine; abundant is the feast:
But not the pleasures of the banquet now
We have in hand: impending o’er our arms
Grave cause of fear, illustrious chief, we see;
Grave doubts, to save, or see destroy’d our ships,
If thou, great warrior, put not forth thy might.
For close beside the ships and wall are camp’d
The haughty Trojans and renown’d allies:
Their watch-fires frequent burn throughout the camp;
And loud their boast that nought shall stay their hands,
Until our dark-ribb’d ships be made their prey.
Jove too for them, with fav’ring augury
Sends forth his lightning; boastful of his strength,
And firmly trusting in the aid of Jove,
Hector, resistless, rages; nought he fears
Or God or man, with martial fury fir’d.
He prays, impatient, for th’ approach of morn;
Then, breaking through the lofty sterns, resolv’d
To the devouring flames to give the ships,
And slay the crews, bewilder’d in the smoke.
And much my mind misgives me, lest the Gods
His threats fulfil, and we be fated here
To perish, far from Argos’ grassy plains.
Up then! if in their last extremity
Thy spirit inclines, though late, to save the Greeks
Sore press’d by Trojan arms: lest thou thyself
Hereafter feel remorse; the evil done
Is past all cure; then thou reflect betimes
How from the Greeks to ward the day of doom.
Dear friend, remember now thy father’s words,
The aged Peleus, when to Atreus’ son
He sent thee forth from Phthia, how he said,
‘My son, the boon of strength, if so they will,
Juno or Pallas have the pow’r to give;
But thou thyself thy haughty spirit must curb.
For better far is gentle courtesy:
And cease from angry strife, that so the Greeks
The more may honour thee, both young and old.’
Such were the words thine aged father spoke,
Which thou hast now forgotten; yet, e’en now,
Pause for awhile, and let thine anger cool;
And noble gifts, so thou thy wrath remit,
From Agamemnon shalt thou bear away.
Listen to me, while I recount the gifts
Which in his tent he pledg’d him to bestow.
Sev’n tripods promis’d he, untouch’d by fire,
Of gold, ten talents, twenty caldrons bright,
Twelve pow’rful horses, in the course renown’d.
Who by their speed have many prizes won.
Not empty-handed could that man be deem’d,
Nor poor in gold, who but so much possess’d
As by those horses has for him been won.
Sev’n women too, well skill’d in household cares,
Lesbians, whom he selected for himself,
That day thou captur’dst Lesbos’ goodly isle,
In beauty far surpassing all their sex.
These will he give; and with them will he send
The fair Briseis, her whom from thy tent
He bore away; and add a solemn oath,
He ne’er approach’d her bed, nor held with her
Such intercourse as man with woman holds.
All these shall now be thine: but if the Gods
Shall grant us Priam’s city to destroy,
Of gold and brass, when we divide the spoil,
With countless heaps a vessel shalt thou freight,
And twenty captives thou thyself shalt choose,
All only less than Argive Helen fair.
And if it be our fate to see again
The teeming soil of Argos, thou mayst be
His son by marriage, and in honour held
As is Orestes, who, his only son,
Is rear’d at home in luxury, and ease.
Three daughters fair are his, Chrysothemis,
Iphianassa, and Laodice;
Of these whiche’er thou wilt, to Peleus’ house,
No portion ask’d for, thou shalt take to wife;
And with her will he add such wedding gifts,
As never man before to daughter gave.
Sev’n prosp’rous towns besides; Cardamyle,
And Enope, and Ira’s grassy plains,
And Pherae, and Antheia’s pastures deep,
Æpeia fair, and vine-clad Pedasus;
All by the sea, by sandy Pylos’ bounds.
The dwellers there in flocks and herds are rich,
And, as a God, will honour thee with gifts,
And to thy sceptre ample tribute pay.
All these he gives, so thou thy wrath remit.
But if thou hold Atrides in such hate,
Him and his gifts, yet let thy pity rest
On all the other Greeks, thus sore bested;
By whom thou shalt be honour’d as a God:
For great the triumph that thou now mayst gain;
E’en Hector’s self is now within thy reach;
For he is near at hand; and in his pride
And martial fury deems that none, of all
Our ships contain, can rival him in arms.”

Whom answer’d thus Achilles, swift of foot:
“Heav’n-born Ulysses, sage in council, son
Of great Laertes, I must frankly speak
My mind at once, my fix’d resolve declare:
That from henceforth I may not by the Greeks,
By this man and by that, be importun’d.
Him as the gates of hell my soul abhors,
Whose outward words his secret thoughts belie,
Hear then what seems to me the wisest course.
On me nor Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
Nor others shall prevail, since nought is gain’d
By toil unceasing in the battle field.
Who nobly fight, but share with those who skulk;
Like honours gain the coward and the brave;
Alike the idlers and the active die:
And nought it profits me, though day by day
In constant toil I set my life at stake;
But as a bird, though ill she fare herself,
Brings to her callow brood the food she takes,
So I through many a sleepless night have lain,
And many a bloody day have labour’d through,
Engag’d in battle on your wives’ behalf.
Twelve cities have I taken with my ships;
Eleven more by land, on Trojan soil:
From all of these abundant stores of wealth
I took, and all to Agamemnon gave;
He, safe beside his ships, my spoils receiv’d,
A few divided, but the most retain’d.
To other chiefs and Kings he meted out
Their sev’ral portions, and they hold them still;
From me, from me alone of all the Greeks,
He bore away, and keeps my cherish’d wife;
Well! let him keep her, solace of his bed!
But say then, why do Greeks with Trojans fight?
Why hath Atrides brought this mighty host
To Troy, if not in fair-hair’d Helen’s cause?
Of mortals are there none that love their wives,
Save Atreus’ sons alone? or do not all,
Who boast the praise of sense and virtue, love
And cherish each his own? as her I lov’d
E’en from my soul, though captive of my spear.
Now, since he once hath robb’d me, and deceiv’d,
Let him not seek my aid; I know him now,
And am not to be won; let him devise,
With thee, Ulysses, and the other Kings,
How best from hostile fires to save his ships.
He hath completed many mighty works
Without my aid; hath built a lofty wall,
And dug a trench around it, wide and deep,
And in the trench hath fix’d a palisade;
Nor so the warrior-slayer Hector’s might
Can keep in check; while I was in the field,
Not far without the walls would Hector range
His line of battle, nor beyond the Oak
And Scaean gates would venture; there indeed
He once presum’d to meet me, hand to hand,
And from my onset narrowly escap’d.
But as with Hector now no more I fight,
To-morrow morn, my off’rings made to Jove,
And all the Gods, and freighted well my ships,
And launch’d upon the main, thyself shall see,
If that thou care to see, my vessels spread
O’er the broad bosom of the Hellespont,
My lusty crews plying the vig’rous oar;
And if th’ Earth-shaker send a fav’ring breeze,
Three days will bear us home to Phthia’s shore.
There did I leave abundant store of wealth,
When hitherward I took my luckless way;
Thither from hence I bear, of ruddy gold,
And brass, and women fair, and iron hoar
The share assign’d me; but my chiefest prize
The monarch Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
Himself who gave, with insult takes away.
To him then speak aloud the words I send,
That all may know his crimes, if yet he hope
Some other Greek by treach’rous wiles to cheat,
Cloth’d as he is in shamelessness! my glance,
All brazen as he is, he dare not meet.
I share no more his counsels, nor his acts;
He hath deceiv’d me once, and wrong’d; again
He shall not cozen me! Of him, enough!
I pass him by, whom Jove hath robb’d of sense.
His gifts I loathe, and spurn; himself I hold
At a hair’s worth; and would he proffer me
Tenfold or twentyfold of all he has,
Or ever may be his; or all the gold
Sent to Orchomenos or royal Thebes,
Egyptian, treasurehouse of countless wealth,
Who boasts her hundred gates, through each of which
With horse and car two hundred warriors march:
Nay, were his gifts in number as the sand,
Or dust upon the plain, yet ne’er will I
By Agamemnon be prevail’d upon,
Till I have paid him back my heart’s offence.
Nor e’er of Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
Will I a daughter wed; not were she fair
As golden Venus, and in works renown’d
As Pallas, blue-ey’d Maid, yet her e’en so
I wed not; let him choose some other Greek,
Some fitting match, of nobler blood than mine.
But should the Gods in safety bring me home,
At Peleus’ hands I may receive a wife;
And Greece can boast of many a lovely maid,
In Hellas or in Phthia, daughters fair
Of chiefs who hold their native fortresses:
Of these, at will, a wife I may select:
And ofttimes hath my warlike soul inclin’d
To take a wedded wife, a fitting bride,
And aged Peleus’ wealth in peace enjoy.
For not the stores which Troy, they say, contain’d
In peaceful times, ere came the sons of Greece,
Nor all the treasures which Apollo’s shrine,
The Archer-God, in rock-built Pythos holds,
May weigh with life; of oxen and of sheep
Successful forays may good store provide;
And tripods may be gain’d, and noble steeds:
But when the breath of man hath pass’d his lips,
Nor strength nor foray can the loss repair.
I by my Goddess-mother have been warn’d,
The silver-footed Thetis, that o’er me
A double chance of destiny impends:
If here remaining, round the walls of Troy
I wage the war, I ne’er shall see my home,
But then undying glory shall be mine:
If I return, and see my native land,
My glory all is gone; but length of life
Shall then be mine, and death be long deferr’d.
If others ask’d my counsel, I should say,
‘Homeward direct your course; of lofty Troy
Ye see not yet the end; all-seeing Jove
O’er her extends his hand; on him relying
Her people all with confidence are fill’d.’
Go then; my answer to the chiefs of Greece
Speak boldly—such the privilege of age—
Bid that some better counsel they devise
To save their ships and men; their present scheme,
My anger unappeas’d, avails them nought.
But Phoenix here shall stay, and sleep to-night;
And with the morrow he with me shall sail
And seek our native land, if so he will:
For not by force will I remove him hence.”

He said; they all, confounded by his words,
In silence heard; so sternly did he speak.
At length, in tears, the aged Phoenix spoke,
For greatly fear’d he for the ships of Greece:
“If, great Achilles, on returning home
Thy mind is set, nor canst thou be induc’d
To save the ships from fire, so fierce thy wrath;
How then, dear boy, can I remain behind,
Alone? whom with thee aged Peleus sent,
That day when he in Agamemnon’s cause
From Phthia sent thee, inexperienc’d yet
In all the duties of confed’rate war,
And sage debate, on which attends renown.
Me then he sent, instructor of thy youth,
To prompt thy language, and thine acts to guide.
So not from thee, dear boy, can I consent
To part, though Heav’n should undertake my age
To prompt thy language, and thine acts to guide.
So not from thee, dear boy, can I consent
To part, though Heav’n should undertake my age
To wipe away, and vig’rous youth restore,
Such as I boasted, when from Greece I fled
Before my angry sire, Amyntor, son
Of Ormenus; a fair-hair’d concubine
Cause of the quarrel; her my father lov’d,
And by her love estrang’d, despis’d his wife,
My mother; oft she pray’d me to seduce,
To vex th’ old man, my father’s concubine;
I yielded; he, suspecting, on my head
A curse invok’d, and on the Furies call’d
His curse to witness, that upon his knees
No child, by me begotten, e’er should sit:
His curse the Gods have heard, and ratified,
Th’ infernal King, and awful Proserpine.
Then would I fain have slain him with the sword,
Had not some God my rising fury quell’d,
And set before my mind the public voice,
The odium I should have to bear ’mid Greeks,
If branded with the name of patricide.
But longer in my angry father’s house
To dwell, my spirit brook’d not, though my friends
And kinsmen all besought me to remain;
And many a goodly sheep, and many a steer
They slew, and many swine, with fat o’erlaid,
They sing’d, and roasted o’er the burning coals;
And drank in many a cup the old man’s wine.
Nine nights they kept me in continual watch,
By turns relieving guards. The fires meanwhile
Burnt constant: one beneath the porch that fac’d
The well-fenc’d court; one in the vestibule
Before my chamber door. The tenth dark night
My chamber’s closely-fitting doors I broke,
And lightly vaulted o’er the court-yard fence,
By guards alike and servant maids unmark’d.
Through all the breadth of Hellas then I fled,
Until at length to Phthia’s fruitful soil,
Mother of flocks, to Peleus’ realm I came,
Who kindly welcom’d me, and with such love
As to his only son, his well-belov’d,
A father shows, his gen’rous gifts bestow’d.
He gave me wealth, he gave me ample rule;
And on the bounds of Phthia bade me dwell,
And o’er the Dolopes hold sov’reign sway.
Thee too, Achilles, rival of the Gods,
Such, as thou art I made thee; from my soul
I lov’d thee; nor wouldst thou with others go
Or to the meal, or in the house be fed,
Till on my knee thou satt’st, and by my hand
Thy food were cut, the cup were tender’d thee;
And often, in thy childish helplessness.
The bosom of my dress with wine was drench’d;
Such care I had of thee, such pains I took,
Rememb’ring that by Heav’n’s decree, no son
Of mine I e’er might see; then thee I made,
Achilles, rival of the Gods, my son,
That thou mightst be the guardian of mine age.
But thou, Achilles, curb thy noble rage;
A heart implacable beseems thee not.
The Gods themselves, in virtue, honour, strength,
Excelling thee, may yet be mollified;
For they, when mortals have transgress’d, or fail’d
To do aright, by sacrifice and pray’r,
Libations and burnt-off’rings, may be sooth’d.
Pray’rs are the daughters of immortal Jove;
But halt, and wrinkled, and of feeble sight,
They plod in Ate’s track; while Ate, strong
And swift of foot, outstrips their laggard pace,
And, dealing woe to man, o’er all the earth
Before them flies: they, following, heal her wounds.
Him who with honour welcomes their approach,
They greatly aid, and hear him when he prays;
But who rejects, and sternly casts them off,
To Saturn’s son they go, and make their pray’r
That Ate follow him and claim her dues.
Then to the daughters of immortal Jove,
Do thou, Achilles, show the like respect,
That many another brave man’s heart hath sway’d.
If to thy tent no gifts Atrides brought,
With promises of more, but still retain’d
His vehement enmity, I could not ask
That thou thy cherish’d anger shouldst discard,
And aid the Greeks, how great so-e’er their need.
But now large off’rings hath he giv’n, and more
Hath promis’d; and, of all the Greeks, hath sent
To pray thine aid, the men thou lov’st the best.
Discredit not their mission, nor their words.
Till now, I grant thee, none could blame thy wrath.
In praise of men in ancient days renown’d,
This have we heard, that how-so-e’er might rage
Their hostile feuds, their anger might be still
By gifts averted, and by words appeas’d.
One case I bear in mind, in times long past,
And not in later days; and here, ’mid friends,
How all occurr’d, will I at length recite.
Time was, that with Ætolia’s warlike bands
Round Calydon the Acarnanians fought
With mutual slaughter; these to save the town,
The Acarnanians burning to destroy.
This curse of war the golden-throned Queen
Diana sent, in anger that from her
Œneus the first-fruits of his field withheld.
The other Gods their hecatombs receiv’d;
Diana’s shrine alone no off’rings deck’d,
Neglected, or o’erlook’d; the sin was great;
And in her wrath the arrow-darting Queen
A savage wild-boar sent, with gleaming tusks,
Which Œneus’ vineyard haunting, wrought him harm.
There laid he prostrate many a stately tree,
With root and branch, with blossom and with fruit.
Him Meleager, son of Œneus, slew,
With youths and dogs from all the neighbouring towns
Collected; smaller force had not avail’d,
So huge he was, so fierce; and many a youth
Had by his tusks been laid upon the bier.
A fierce contention then the Goddess rais’d,
For the boar’s head and bristly hide, between
The Acarnanian and th’ Ætolian bands.
While warlike Meleager kept the field,
So long the Acarnanians far’d but ill;
Nor dar’d, despite the numbers of their host,
Maintain their ground before the city walls.
When he to anger yielded, which sometimes
Swells in the bosom e’en of wisest men,
Incens’d against his mother, he withdrew
To Cleopatra fair, his wedded wife;
(Marpessa her, Evenus’ daughter, bore
To Idas, strongest man of all who then
Were living, who against Apollo’s self
For the neat-footed maiden bent his bow.
Her parents call’d the child Alcyone,
In mem’ry of the tears her mother shed,
Rival of Alcyon’s melancholy fate,
When by far-darting Phoebus forc’d away).
With her, retiring from the field, he nurs’d
His wrath; resenting thus his mother’s curse,
Althaea; she her brother’s death bore hard,
And pray’d to Heav’n above, and with her hands
Beating the solid earth, the nether pow’rs,
Pluto and awful Proserpine, implor’d,
Down on her knees, her bosom wet with tears,
Death on her son invoking; from the depths
Of Erebus Erinnys heard her pray’r,
Gloom-haunting Goddess, dark and stern of heart.
Soon round the gates the din of battle rose,
The tow’rs by storm assaulted; then his aid
Th’ Ætonian Elders and the sacred priests
With promises of great reward implor’d.
A fruitful plot they bade him set apart,
The richest land in lovely Calydon,
Of fifty acres: half for vineyard meet,
And half of fertile plain, for tillage clear’d.
Upon the threshold of his lofty rooms
Old Œneus stood, and at the portals clos’d
He knock’d in vain, a suppliant to his son.
His sisters and his brother join’d their pray’rs,
But sterner his rejection of their suit;
The friends he valued most, and lov’d the best,
Yet they too fail’d his fix’d resolve to shake;
Till to his very doors the war had reach’d,
The foe upon the tow’rs, the town in flames:
Then Meleager’s beauteous wife, at length,
In tears, beseeching him, the thousand ills
Recall’d, which on a captur’d town attend;
The slaughter’d men, the city burnt with fire,
The helpless children and deep-bosom’d dames
A prey to strangers. List’ning to the tale,
His spirit was rous’d within him; and again
He took the field, and donn’d his glitt’ring arms.
Thus did his act from doom th’ Ætolians save
Spontaneous; yet he gain’d not, though he sav’d,
The rich reward they once were pledg’d to give.
But be not thou like him, nor let thy God
Turn thitherward thy thoughts; our ships on fire,
Thine aid will less be priz’d; come, take the gifts,
And as a God be honour’d by the Greeks.
If thou hereafter, unsolicited,
The battle join, the Greeks thou mayst protect,
But not an equal share of honour gain.”

Whom answer’d thus Achilles, swift of foot:
“Phoenix, my second father, rev’rend sire,
Such honours move me not; my honour comes
From Jove, whose will it is that I should here
Remain beside the ships, while I retain
Breath in my lungs and vigour in my limbs.
This too I say, and bear it in thy mind:
Disturb me not with weeping and complaints,
To do Atrides grace; if him thou love,
My love for thee perchance may turn to hate:
My friend should honour him who honours me.
But come with me, and of my kingdom half,
And equal honours shalt thou share with me.
These shall our message bear; stay thou the while,
And on soft couch repose; to-morrow morn
Will we determine or to sail or stay.”

He said, and with his eyebrows gave a sign
In silence to Patroclus, to prepare
A bed for Phoenix, that without delay
The rest might leave the tent; then thus began
Ajax, the godlike son of Telamon:
“Ulysses sage, Laertes’ high-born son,
Depart we now; for this way our discourse
Can lead to no result; behoves us bear
Our tidings, all unwelcome as they are,
Back to the chiefs awaiting our return.
Achilles hath allow’d his noble heart
To cherish rancour and malignant hate;
Nor reeks he of his old companions’ love,
Wherewith we honour’d him above the rest.
Relentless he! a son’s or brother’s death,
By payment of a fine, may be aton’d;
The slayer may remain in peace at home,
The debt discharg’d; the other will forego,
The forfeiture receiv’d, his just revenge;
But thou maintain’st a stern, obdurate mood.
And for a single girl! we offer sev’n,
Surpassing fair, and other gifts to boot.
We now bespeak thy courtesy; respect
Thy hearth; remember that beneath thy roof
We stand, deputed by the gen’ral voice
Of all the host; and fain would claim to be,
Of all the Greeks, thy best and dearest friends.”

Whom answer’d thus Achilles, swift of foot:
“Illustrious Ajax, son of Telamon,
Without offence hast thou thy message giv’n;
But fury fills my soul, whene’er I think
How Agamemnon, ’mid th’ assembled Greeks,
Insulting, held me forth to public scorn,
As some dishonour’d, houseless vagabond.
But go ye now, and bear my answer back:
No more in bloody war will I engage,
Till noble Hector, Priam’s godlike son,
O’er slaughter’d Greeks, your ships enwrapp’d in fire,
Shall reach the quarters of the Myrmidons.
Ere he assail my ship and tents, I think
That Hector, valiant as he is, will pause.”
Thus he: they each the double goblet rais’d,
And, to the Gods their due libations pour’d,
Ulysses leading, to the ships return’d.

Meanwhile Patroclus bade th’ attendant maids
Prepare a bed for Phoenix; they obey’d,
And quickly laid the bed with fleeces warm,
And rugs, and linen light and fine o’erspread.
There slept th’ old man, and waited for the morn.
Within the tent’s recess Achilles slept;
And by his side, from Lesbos captive brought,
Daughter of Phorbas, Diomede fair;
On th’ other side Patroclus lay; with him
The graceful Iphis, whom, when Scyros’ isle
He captur’d, and Enyes’ rock-built fort,
Achilles to his lov’d companion gave.

When to Atrides’ tent the envoys came,
The chiefs, uprising, pledg’d them one by one
In golden goblets; then their tidings ask’d.
First Agamemnon, King of men, enquir’d:
“Tell me, renown’d Ulysses, pride of Greece,
What says he: will he save our ships from fire,
Or still, in wrathful mood, withhold his aid?”

To whom again Ulysses, stout of heart:
“Most mighty Agamemnon, King of men,
His anger is not quench’d, but fiercer still
It glows; thy gifts and thee alike he spurns;
He bids thee with the other chiefs concert
The means thy people and thy ships to save;
And menaces himself at early dawn
To launch his well-trimm’d vessels on the main.
Nay more, he counsels others, so he says,
Homeward to turn, since here of lofty Troy
We see not yet the end; all-seeing Jove
O’er her extends his hand; on him relying,
Her people all with confidence are fill’d.
Such was his language; here before you stand
Ajax and both the heralds, sage, grave men,
Who with me went, and will confirm my words.
Old Phoenix left we there, so will’d the chief,
That with the morrow he with him may sail,
And seek their native land, if so he will;
For not by force will he remove him hence.”

Ulysses thus; they all in silence heard,
Amaz’d, so stern the message that he bore.
Long time in silence sat the chiefs of Greece.
Outspoke at length the valiant Diomed:
“Most mighty Agamemnon, King of men,
Would that thou ne’er hadst stoop’d with costly gifts
To sue for aid from Peleus’ matchless son;
For he before was over-proud, and now
Thine offers will have tenfold swoll’n his pride.
But leave we him, according to his will,
To go or stay: he then will join the fight,
When his own spirit shall prompt, or Heav’n inspire.
But hear ye all, and do as I advise:
Refresh’d with food and wine (for therein lie
Both strength and courage), turn we to our rest;
And when the rosy-finger’d morn appears,
Thyself among the foremost, with bold hearts,
Before our ships both horse and foot array.”

He said; and all the chiefs with loud applause
His speech confirm’d; then, due libations pour’d,
Each to his sev’ral tent they all withdrew;
Then laid them down, and sought the boon of sleep.





In night-long slumbers lay the other chiefs
Of all the Greeks, by gentle sleep subdued;
But not on Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
By various cares oppress’d, sweet slumber fell.
As when from Jove, the fair-hair’d Juno’s Lord,
Flashes the lightning, bringing in its train
Tempestuous storm of mingled rain and hail
Or snow, by winter sprinkled o’er the fields;
Or op’ning wide the rav’nous jaws of war;
So Agamemnon from his inmost heart
Pour’d forth in groans his multitudinous grief,
His spirit within him sinking. On the plain
He look’d, and there, alarm’d, the watchfires saw,
Which, far advanc’d before the walls of Troy,
Blaz’d numberless; and thence of pipes and flutes
He heard the sound, and busy hum of men.
Upon the ships he look’d, and men of Greece,
And by the roots his hair in handfuls tore
To Jove on high; deep groan’d his mighty heart.
Thus as he mus’d, the wisest course appear’d,
With Nestor, son of Neleus, to confer,
If they some scheme in council might devise
To ward destruction from the Grecian host.
He rose, and o’er his body drew his vest,
And underneath his well-turn’d feet he bound
His sandals fair; then o’er his shoulders threw,
Down reaching to his feet, a lion’s skin,
Tawny and vast; then grasp’d his pond’rous spear.

On Menelaus weigh’d an equal dread;
Nor on his eyes that night had slumber sat,
Lest ill befall the Greeks; who, in his cause,
Crossing the wat’ry waste, had come to Troy,
And bold defiance to the Trojans giv’n.
Round his broad chest a panther’s skin he threw;
Then on his head his brazen helmet plac’d,
And in his brawny hand a lance he bore.
To meet his brother went he forth, of Greece
The mighty monarch, as a God rever’d.
Him by the ship he found, in act to arm;
And welcome was his presence to the King.

Then valiant Menelaus first began:
“Why thus in arms, good brother? seek’st thou one
The Trojan camp to spy? I greatly fear
That none will undertake the task, alone
To spy the movements of the hostile camp
In the dark night: stout-hearted he must be.”

To whom the monarch Agamemnon thus:
“Great need, my noble brother, have we both
Of sagest counsels, if we hope the Greeks
And Grecian ships from ruin to preserve,
Since turn’d against us is the mind of Jove.
To Hector’s off’rings most his soul inclines;
For never have I seen, or heard men tell,
How in one day one man has wrought such loss
As Hector, dear to Jove, yet not the son
Of God or Goddess, on the Greeks has wrought.
Such deeds hath he achiev’d, such havoc made,
As we shall long in bitter mem’ry keep.
Haste thou amid the ships, and hither bring
Idomeneus and Ajax; I the while
Will Nestor rouse, and urge that he with us
The outposts visit, and instruct the guard.
To him they best will listen; for his son
Commands the watch; with him Meriones,
The follower of the King Idomeneus:
To them by pref’rence hath this charge been giv’n.”

He said: and Menelaus answer’d thus:
“What wouldst thou have me do then? here remain
With them, and wait thy coming, or to them
Thy message give, and follow in thy steps?”

Him answer’d Agamemnon, King of men:
“Remain thou here, lest haply we might fail
To meet; for in the camp are many paths.
But thou, where’er thou go’st, each sev’ral man
Address, and ask to rise; to each his name
And patronymic giving; pay to each
All due respect; nor bear thee haughtily;
We like the rest must share the load of toil.
Which Jove assigns to all of mortal birth.”

His brother thus with counsels wise dismiss’d,
The King to aged Nestor took his way:
Him by his tent and dark-ribb’d ship he found
On a soft couch; beside him lay his arms,
His shield, two lances, and a glitt’ring helm:
There lay the rich-wrought belt the old man wore,
When to the battle, arm’d, he led his troops;
For nought to age’s weakness would he yield.
Raising his head, and on his elbow propp’d,
He question’d thus Atrides: “Who art thou,
That wand’rest through th’ encampment thus alone,
In the dark night, when other mortals sleep?
Seek’st thou some mule broke loose, or comrade lost?
Speak, nor in silence come; what wouldst thou here?”

To whom thus Agamemnon, King of men:
“O Nestor! son of Neleus, pride of Greece,
Know me for Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
On whom hath Jove, beyond the lot of men,
Laid grief that ne’er shall end, while I retain
Breath in my lungs, and vigour in my limbs.
I wander thus, because these eyes of mine
Sweet slumber visits not, by cares of war
Oppress’d, and harass’d by the woes of Greece.
Much for the Greeks I fear; nor keeps my mind
Its wonted firmess; I am ill at ease;
And leaps my troubled heart as tho’ ’twould burst
My bosom’s bounds; my limbs beneath me shake.
But if thou wilt, since thou too know’st not sleep,
Together to the outposts let us go,
And see if there, by toil and sleep o’erpow’r’d,
The guard repose, neglectful of their watch.
The foe is close at hand; nor are we sure
He may not hazard e’en a night attack.”

To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied;
“Most mighty Agamemnon, King of men,
Not all the hopes that Hector entertains
Shall by the Lord of counsel be fulfill’d;
For him are toil and danger yet in store,
If but Achilles of his wrath repent.
Gladly will I attend thee; others too,
Tydides, spearman bold, Ulysses sage,
Ajax the swift, and Phyleus’ noble son,
Should all be summon’d; and ’twere well that one
Across the camp should run, to call in haste
The godlike Ajax, and Idomeneus;
Theirs are the farthest ships, nor near at hand.
But, dear to me as Menelaus is,
And highly honour’d, I must blame, that thus
(Though thou shouldst take offence, I needs must say)
He sleeps, and leaves the toil to thee alone.
With all the chiefs he should be busied now,
Imploring aid, in this our utmost need.”

To whom thus Agamemnon, King of men:
“For other times, old man, reserve thy blame;
Sometimes, I own, he lags behind, nor takes
His share of labour; not from indolence,
Or want of sense; but still regarding me;
Waiting from me an impulse to receive.
But now, before me he was up, and came
To visit me; and I have sent him on
To call those very men whom thou hast nam’d.
Come then; for we, beside the gates, and guard
Shall find them; there my orders were to meet.”

To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied;
“Then none can blame him; nor can any Greek
Justly refuse his summons to obey.”

He said, and round his body wrapped his vest;
Then on his feet his sandals fair he bound,
And o’er his shoulders clasp’d a purple cloak,
Doubled, with ample folds, and downy pile;
Then took his spear, with point of sharpen’d brass,
And through the camp prepar’d to take his way.
Gerenian Nestor from his slumbers first
Ulysses, sage as Jove in council, rous’d,
Loud shouting; soon the voice his senses reach’d;
Forth from his tent he came, and thus he spoke:
“What cause so urgent leads you, through the camp,
In the dark night to wander thus alone?”

To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied:
“Ulysses sage, Laertes’ godlike son,
Be not offended; such the stress that now
Weighs down our army; come thou then with us,
And others let us call; with whom ’tis meet
That we should counsel take, to fight or fly.”

He said; Ulysses to the tent return’d;
Then, his broad shield across his shoulders thrown,
Came forth again, and with them took his way.
To Diomed, the son of Tydeus, next
They went; and him they found beside his arms,
Without his tent; his comrades slept around,
Their heads upon their bucklers laid; their spears
Stood upright, on the butts; the burnish’d brass
Like Heav’n’s own lightning, flashing far around.
Stretch’d on a wild bull’s hide the chief repos’d,
A gay-wrought carpet roll’d beneath his head.
Gerenian Nestor close behind him stood,
And touched him with his foot, and thus in tone
Reproachful spoke: “Arouse thee, Tydeus’ son!
Why sleep’st thou thus all night? or know’st thou not
That on the very margin of the plain,
And close beside the ships the Trojans lie,
And little space between the camps is left?”

Quick rous’d from sleep, thus answer’d Diomed:
“Beshrew thy heart, old man! no labour seems
For thee too hard; are there not younger men
To run about the camp, and summon all
The sev’ral chiefs? thou dost too much, old man.”

To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied:
“True, friend, and full of wisdom are thy words;
Good sons indeed I have, and followers brave
And many, who might well my message bear;
But great is now the stress that lies on Greece;
For on a razor’s edge is balanc’d now,
To all the Greeks, the chance of life or death.
Do thou then go (for thou my younger art),
And if thou pity me, thyself arouse
Ajax the swift, and Phyleus’ noble son.”
He said; the warrior round his shoulders threw,
Down reaching to his feet, a lion’s hide,
Tawny and dark; and took his pond’rous spear.
He went, arous’d, and with him brought the chiefs.

When to the guard they came, not sunk in sleep
Found they the leaders; but on wakeful watch
Intent, and all alert beside their arms.
As round a sheepfold keep their anxious watch
The dogs, who in the neighbouring thicket hear
Some beast, that, bold in search of prey, has come
Down from the mountain; loud the clamours rise
Of men and dogs; all sleep is banish’d thence;
So from their eyes was banish’d sleep, who watch’d
Through that disastrous night; still plainward turning
At ev’ry movement in the Trojan camp.
The old man saw, well-pleas’d; and thus address’d
With cheering words the captains of the guard:
“Watch ever thus, good youths; nor be surpris’d
By slumber, lest the foe a triumph gain.”

This said, he cross’d the ditch, and with him went
The Grecian leaders, to the council call’d:
With them, admitted to the conf’rence, went
Meriones, and Nestor’s noble son.
The deep-dug ditch they cross’d, and sat them down
Upon an open space, from corpses clear;
Where Hector from the slaughter of the Greeks
Turn’d back, when Ev’ning spread her veil around:
There sat they down, and there the conf’rence held.
Gerenian Nestor first took up the word:
“O friends! is any here with heart so bold
Who dares, self-confident, the Trojan camp
To enter? there some straggler he might take,
Or in the camp itself some tidings gain,
What are their secret counsels; if they mean
Here by the ships to hold their ground, or back,
Sated with vict’ry, to the town retire.
This could he learn, and hither scatheless bring
His tidings, high as Heav’n in all men’s mouths
Would be his praise, and ample his reward.
For ev’ry captain of a ship should give
A coal-black ewe, and at her foot a lamb,
A prize beyond compare; and high should be
His place at banquets and at solemn feasts.”

He said; but all the chiefs in silence heard;
Then rose the valiant Diomed, and said:
“Nestor, that heart is mine; I dare alone
Enter the hostile camp, so close at hand;
Yet were one comrade giv’n me, I should go
With more of comfort, more of confidence.
Where two combine, one before other sees
The better course; and ev’n though one alone
The readiest way discover, yet would be
His judgment slower, his decision less.”

He said, and many chiefs to Diomed
Proffer’d companionship; stood forth at once,
With him to penetrate the Trojan camp,
The two Ajaces, ministers of Mars;
Stood forth Meriones, and eagerly
Stood forth the son of Nestor; Atreus’ son,
The royal Menelaus, spearman bold,
And stout Ulysses, whose enduring heart
For ev’ry deed of valour was prepar’d.
Rose Agamemnon, King of men, and said:
“Tydides, comrade dearest to my soul,
Choose thou thine own companion, whom thou wilt;
Of all the many here that proffer aid
Him whom thou deem’st the best; nor from respect
To persons leave the better man behind,
And take the worse; nor def’rence show to rank,
Not though the purest royal blood were his.”

In fear for Menelaus thus he spoke:
Then answer’d valiant Diomed, and said;
“If my companion I may freely choose,
How can I pass the sage Ulysses by?
Of ready wit, and dauntless courage, prov’d
In ev’ry danger; and to Pallas dear.
I should not fear, by him accompanied,
To pass through fire, and safely both return;
So far in prudence he surpasses all.”

Whom answer’d thus Ulysses, stout of heart:
“Tydides, nor exaggerated praise
Bestow on me, nor censure; for thou speak’st
To those who know me all for what I am.
But go we; night wanes fast, the morn is near:
The stars are high in Heav’n; and of the night
Two thirds are spent, one third alone remains.”

He said; and both prepar’d to don their arms.
The youthful warrior Thrasymedes gave
To Diomed a two-edg’d sword (his own
Had in the ship been left) and ample shield;
Then on his brows a leathern headpiece plac’d,
Without or peak or plume; a simple casque,
Such as is worn by youths to guard their head.
A bow, and well-fill’d quiver, and a sword,
Meriones to sage Ulysses gave;
And on his brows a leathern headpiece plac’d,
Well wrought within, with num’rous straps secur’d,
And on th’ outside, with wild boars’ gleaming tusks
Profusely garnish’d, scatter’d here and there
By skilful hand; the midst with felt was lin’d;
This from Amyntor, son of Ormenus,
Autolycus from Eleon bore away,
Spoil of his pillag’d house; Autolycus
Gave to Amphidamas, Cytheran chief,
Who in Scandea dwelt; Amphidamas
To Molus, pledge of friendship; he again
Gave to his son, Meriones, from whom
It now encircled sage Ulysses’ brow.
Thus with accoutrements and arms supplied,
They left their brother chiefs, and took their way.
Then close beside their path, by Pallas sent,
Rose, on the right, a heron; through the gloom
They saw it not indeed, but heard the cry.
The fav’ring sign with joy Ulysses hail’d,
And thus to Pallas pray’d: “Hear me, thou child
Of aegis-bearing Jove, who still hast stood
In ev’ry peril at my side, whose eye
My ev’ry movement sees; now, Goddess, now
Befriend me; grant that safe, with triumph crown’d,
We may return, some great exploit achiev’d,
Such as the Trojans long may bear in mind.”

Him following, thus the brave Tydides pray’d:
“My voice too, child of Jove, undaunted, hear;
And be with me, as with my father erst,
The godlike Tydeus, when to Thebes he went,
An envoy, in advance; and left behind,
Upon Asopus’ banks the mail-clad Greeks.
Smooth was the message which to Thebes he bore;
But great, his mission ended, were the deeds
That with thine aid he wrought; for, Goddess, thou
Wast with him, and thine arm was his defence:
So be thou now with me, and me defend.
Then on thine altar will I sacrifice
A yearling heifer, broad of brow, untam’d,
Whereon no yoke hath mortal ever laid:
Her will I give, and tip her horns with gold.”

Thus as they pray’d, their pray’r the Goddess heard;
Then, their devotions ended, on they far’d
Through the deep dead of night, like lions twain,
’Mid slaughter, corpses, arms, and blacken’d gore.

Nor, in the Trojan camp, did Hector leave
The chiefs to rest; but all to conf’rence call’d,
The leaders and the councillors of Troy;
To whom his prudent speech he thus address’d:
“Who is there here, that for a rich reward
A noble work will undertake? A car
And two strong-collar’d horses, best of all
That can be found within the Grecian lines,
Shall he receive, who, to his endless praise,
Shall dare approach the ships; and learn if still
They keep their wonted watch, or, by our arms
Subdued and vanquished, meditate retreat,
And, worn with toil, the nightly watch neglect.”
Thus Hector spoke; but all in silence heard.

There was one Dolon in the Trojan camp,
The herald’s son, Eumedes; rich in gold
And brass; not fair of face, but swift of foot;
Amid five sisters he the only son;
Who thus to Hector and the Trojans spoke:

“Hector, with dauntless courage I will dare
Approach the ships, and bring thee tidings sure;
But hold thou forth thy royal staff, and swear
That I the horses and the brass-bound car
Shall have, the boast of Peleus’ matchless son:
Not vain shall be my errand, nor deceive
Thy hopes; right through the camp I mean to pass
To Agamemnon’s tent, where all the chiefs
Debate in council, or to fight or fly.”

He said; and Hector took his royal staff,
And swore to him: “Be witness Jove himself,
The Lord of thunder, that no Trojan man,
Thyself except, shall e’er those horses drive;
For thee they are reserv’d, a glorious prize.”

Thus Hector swore; though unfulfill’d the oath.
The hope to Dolon fresh assurance gave.
Forthwith, his bow across his shoulders slung,
A grisly wolf-skin o’er it, on his head
A cap of marten’s fur, and in his hand
A jav’lin, from the camp he took his way,
Straight to the Grecian ships; but never thence
Destin’d to bring th’ expected tidings back.

The crowd of men and horses left behind,
Briskly he mov’d along; Ulysses first
Mark’d his approach, and to Tydides said:
“See, from the camp where some one this way comes,
With what intent I know not; if to play
The spy about the ships, or rob the dead.
Turn we aside, and let him pass us by
A little way; we then with sudden rush
May seize him; or if he outstrip us both
By speed of foot, may urge him tow’rd the ships,
Driving him still before us with our spears,
And from, the city cutting off his flight.”
Thus saying, ’mid the dead, beside the road
They crouch’d; he, all unconscious, hasten’d by.
But when such space was interpos’d as leave
Between the sluggish oxen and themselves[3]
A team of mules (so much the faster they
Through the stiff fallow drag the jointed plough),
They rush’d upon him; at the sound he stopp’d,
Deeming that from the Trojan camp they came,
By Hector sent, to order his return.
Within a spear’s length when they came, or less,
For foes he knew them, and to night address’d
His active limbs; they rush’d in hot pursuit.
And as two hounds, well practis’d in the chase,
With glist’ning fangs, unflagging, strain to catch,
In woodland glade, some pricket deer, or hare,
That flies before them, screaming; so those two,
Tydides and Ulysses, stout of heart,
With fiery zeal, unflagging, strain’d to catch
The flying Dolon, from the camp cut off;
But when the fugitive approach’d the ships,
Close by the guard, fresh vigour Pallas gave
To Diomed, lest haply from the walls
Some other might anticipate his blow,
And he himself but second honours gain.
Tydides then with threat’ning gesture cried,
“Stop, or I hurl my spear; and small thy chance,
If I assail thee, of escape from death.”
He said, and threw his spear; but by design
It struck him not; above his shoulder flew
The polish’d lance, and quiver’d in the ground.
Sudden he stopp’d, with panic paralys’d:
His teeth all chatt’ring, pale with fear he stood,
With falt’ring accents; panting, they came up
And seiz’d him in their grasp; he thus, in tears:
“Spare but my life; my life I can redeem;
For ample stores I have of gold, and brass,
And well-wrought iron; and of these my sire
Would pay a gen’rous ransom, could he learn
That in the Grecian ships I yet surviv’d.”

To whom Ulysses, deep-designing, thus:
“Be of good cheer; nor let the fear of death
Disturb thy mind; but tell me truly this;
How is ’t that tow’rd the ships thou com’st alone,
In the still night, when other mortals sleep?
Com’st thou perchance for plunder of the dead?
Or seek’st upon our ships to play the spy,
By Hector sent? or of thine own accord?”

Then Dolon thus—his knees with terror shook—
“With much persuasion, of my better mind
Hector beguil’d me, off’ring as my prize
Achilles’ horses and his brass-bound car;
Through the dark night he sent me, and enjoin’d,
Ent’ring your hostile camp, to learn if still
Ye keep your wonted watch, or by our arms
Subdued and vanquish’d, meditate retreat,
And worn with toil, your nightly watch neglect.”

To whom Ulysses thus with scornful smile:
“High soar’d thy hopes indeed, that thought to win
The horses of Achilles; hard are they
For mortal man to harness or control,
Save for Achilles’ self, the Goddess-born.
But tell me truly this; when here thou cam’st,
Where left’st thou Hector, guardian chief of Troy?
Where are his warlike arms? his horses where?
Where lie the rest? and where are plac’d their guards?
What are their secret counsels? do they mean
Here by the ships to keep their ground, or back,
Sated with vict’ry, to the town return?”

Whom Dolon answer’d thus, Eumedes’ son:
“Thy questions all true answers shall receive;
Hector, with those who share his counsels, sits
In conf’rence, far apart, near Ilus’ tomb;
But for the guards thou speak’st of, noble chief,
Not one is station’d to protect the camp.
Around the Trojan fires indeed, perforce,
A watch is kept; and they, among themselves,
Due caution exercise: but, for th’ Allies,
They sleep, and to the Trojans leave the watch,
Since nor their children nor their wives are near.”

To whom in answer sage Ulysses thus:
“Say now, where sleep they? with the Trojans mix’d,
Or separate? explain, that I may know.”

Whom answer’d Dolon thus, Eumedes’ son:
“To this too will I give ye answer true;
Next to the sea the Carian forces lie;
The Paeon archers and the Leleges,
The Caucons, and the bold Pelasgians next;
On Thymbra’s side the Lycians’ lot has fall’n,
The Mysians brave, the Phrygian cavalry,
And the Maeonians with their horsehair plumes.
But why of these enquire? if ye intend
An inroad on the camp, apart from all,
New come, the farthest off, the Thracians lie:
Rhesus their King, the son of Eioneus,
Sleeps in the midst; no steeds that e’er I saw
For size and beauty can with his compare:
Whiter than snow, and swifter than the wind.
With gold and silver is his chariot wrought,
His armour golden, of gigantic size,
A marvel to behold! it seems not meet
For mortal man, but for th’ immortal Gods.
But take me now in safety to the ships;
Or leave me here in fetters bound, that so,
Ere ye return, ye may approve my words,
And see if I have told you true, or no.”

To whom thus Diomed with stern regard:
“Dolon, though good thy tidings, hope not thou,
Once in our hands, to ’scape the doom of death;
For if we now should let thee go, again
In after times thou mightst our ships approach,
As secret spy, or open enemy:
But if beneath my hands thou lose thy life,
No farther trouble shalt thou cause the Greeks.”
He said; and as the suppliant sought in vain
To touch his beard, imploring, through his throat,
Both tendons sev’ring, drove his trenchant blade:
Ev’n while he spoke, his head was roll’d in dust.
The cap of marten fur from off his head
They took, the wolf-skin, and the bow unstrung,
And jav’lin; these Ulysses held aloft,
And thus to Pallas pray’d, who gave the spoil:
“Receive, great Goddess, these our gifts; to thee,
Of all th’ Immortals on Olympus’ height,
Our off’rings first we give; conduct us now,
The Thracian camp and Thracian steeds to gain.”

Thus as he spoke, amid the tamarisk scrub
Far off he threw the trophies; then with reeds,
And twigs new broken from the tamarisk boughs,
He set a mark, lest in the gloom of night
Returning, they might haply miss the spot.
Then on they pass’d thro’ arms and blacken’d gore,
And reach’d the confines of the Thracian camp.
There found they all by sleep subdued; their arms
Beside them on the ground, in order due,
In triple rows; and by the side of each,
Harness’d and yok’d, his horses ready stood.
Surrounded by his warriors, Rhesus slept;
Beside him stood his coursers fleet, their reins
Suspended to the chariot’s topmost rail:
Ulysses mark’d him as he lay, and said,
“This is the man, Tydides, these the steeds,
To us by Dolon, whom we slew, describ’d.
Now then, put forth thy might; beseems it not
To stand thus idly with thine arms in hand:
Loose thou the horses; or do thou the men
Despatch, and to my care the horses leave.”

He said: and Pallas vigour new inspir’d,
That right and left he smote; dire were the groans
Of slaughter’d men; the earth was red with blood;
And as a lion on th’ untended flock
Of sheep or goats with savage onslaught springs,
Ev’n so Tydides on the Thracians sprang,
Till twelve were slain; and as Tydides’ sword
Gave each to death, Ulysses by the feet
Drew each aside; reflecting, that perchance
The horses, startled, might refuse to pass
The corpses; for as yet they knew them not.
But when Tydides saw the sleeping King,
A thirteenth victim to his sword was giv’n,
Painfully breathing; for by Pallas’ art,
He saw that night, as in an evil dream,
The son of Œneus standing o’er his head.
Meanwhile Ulysses sage the horses loos’d;
He gather’d up the reins, and with his bow
(For whip was none at hand) he drove them forth;
Then softly whistling to Tydides gave
A signal; he, the while, remain’d behind,
Musing what bolder deed he yet might do;
Whether the seat, whereon the arms were laid,
To draw away, or, lifted high in air,
To bear it off in triumph on the car;
Or on the Thracians farther loss inflict;
But while he mus’d, beside him Pallas stood,
And said, “Bethink thee, Tydeus’ son, betimes
Of thy return, lest, if some other God
Should wake the Trojans, thou shouldst need to fly.”

She said; the heav’nly voice he recogniz’d,
And mounted straight the car; Ulysses touch’d
The horses with his bow; and, urg’d to speed,
They tow’rd the ships their rapid course pursued.

Nor idle watch Apollo kept, who saw
Tydides o’er the plain by Pallas led;
With anger fill’d, the Trojan camp he sought;
And Rhesus’ kinsman, good Hippocoon,
The Thracian councillor, from sleep arous’d;
Awaking, when the vacant space he view’d,
Where late had stood the horses; and his friends
Gasping in death, and welt’ring in their blood,
He groan’d as on his comrade’s name he call’d:
Then loud the clamour rose, and wild uproar,
Unspeakable, of Trojans thronging round;
They marvell’d at the deeds; but marvell’d more
How they who wrought them had escap’d unscath’d.

Meantime arriv’d where Hector’s scout they slew,
Ulysses, lov’d of Heav’n, a moment check’d
His eager steeds; Tydides from the car
Leap’d to the ground, and in Ulysses’ hand
The bloody trophies plac’d; then mounted quick,
And tow’rd the ships, their destin’d goal, urg’d on
The fiery horses; nothing loth, they flew.
Nestor first heard the sound, and cried, “O friends,
The leaders and the councillors of Greece,
Am I deceiv’d, or is it true? methinks
The sound of horses, hurrying, strikes mine ear;
Grant Heav’n, Ulysses and brave Diomed
May bring those horses from the Trojan camp;
Yet much I fear our bravest may have met
With some disaster ’mid the crowd of foes.”

He scarce had ended, when themselves appear’d,
And from the car descended: welcom’d back
With cordial grasp of hands, and friendly words.
Gerenian Nestor first, enquiring, said:
“Tell me, renown’d Ulysses, pride of Greece,
Whence come these horses? from the Trojan camp?
Or hath some God, that met you by the way,
Bestow’d them, radiant as the beams of light?
Among the Trojans day by day I move;
’Tis not my wont; old warrior though I be,
To lag behind; but horses such as these
I never saw; some God hath giv’n them, sure;
For Jove, the Cloud-compeller, loves you both,
And Pallas, child of aegis-bearing Jove.”

To whom again the sage Ulysses thus:
“O Nestor, son of Neleus, pride of Greece,
Had they so will’d, the Gods, so great their pow’r,
E’en better horses could have giv’n than these;
But these, old man, are Thracians, newly come;
Whose King the valiant Diomed hath slain,
And with him twelve, the best of all his band.
A scout too have we slain, by Hector sent,
And by the Trojan chiefs, to spy our camp.”

He said, and o’er the ditch the horses drove,
Exulting in their prize; and with him went
The other chiefs, rejoicing, through the camp.
Arriv’d at Diomed’s well-order’d tent,
First with strong halters to the rack, where stood,
High-fed with corn, his own swift-footed steeds,
The horses they secur’d; Ulysses then
The bloody spoils of Dolon stow’d away
In the ship’s stern, till fitting sacrifice
To Pallas might be offer’d; to the sea
Descending then, they wash’d away the sweat,
Which on their necks, and thighs, and knees had dried;
The sweat wash’d off, and in the ocean waves
Themselves refresh’d, they sought the polish’d bath;
Then, by the bath restor’d, and all their limbs
Anointed freely with the lissom oil,
Sat down to breakfast; and from flowing bowls
In Pallas’ honour pour’d the luscious wine.





Now rose Aurora from Tithonus’ bed,
To mortals and Immortals bringing light;
When to the ships of Greece came Discord down,
Despatch’d from Jove, with dire portents of war.
Upon Ulysses’ lofty ship she stood,
The midmost, thence to shout to either side,
Or to the tents of Ajax Telamon,
Or of Achilles, who at each extreme,
Confiding in their strength, had moor’d their ships.
There stood the Goddess, and in accents loud
And dread she call’d, and fix’d in ev’ry breast
The fierce resolve to wage unwearied war;
And dearer to their hearts than thoughts of home
Or wish’d return, became the battle-field.

Atrides, loudly shouting, call’d the Greeks
To arms: himself his flashing armour donn’d.
First on his legs the well-wrought greaves he fix’d,
Fasten’d with silver clasps; his ample chest
A breastplate guarded, giv’n by Cinyras
In pledge of friendship; for in Cyprus’ isle
He heard the rumour of the glorious fleet
About to sail for Troy; and sought with gifts
To win the favour of the mighty King.
Ten bands were there inwrought of dusky bronze,
Twelve of pure gold, twice ten of shining tin:
Of bronze six dragons upwards tow’rds the neck
Their length extended, three on either side:
In colour like the bow, which Saturn’s son
Plac’d in the clouds, a sign to mortal men:
Then o’er his shoulder threw his sword; bright flash’d
The golden studs; the silver scabbard shone,
With golden baldrick fitted; next his shield
He took, full-siz’d, well-wrought, well-prov’d in fight;
Around it ran ten circling rims of brass;
With twenty bosses round of burnish’d tin,
And, in the centre, one of dusky bronze.
A Gorgon’s head, with aspect terrible,
Was wrought, with Fear and Flight encircled round:
Depending from a silver belt it hung;
And on the belt a dragon, wrought in bronze,
Twin’d his lithe folds, and turn’d on ev’ry side,
Sprung from a single neck, his triple head.
Then on his brow his lofty helm he plac’d,
Four-crested, double-peak’d, with horsehair plumes,
That nodded,-fearful, from the warrior’s head.
Then took two weighty lances, tipp’d with brass,
Which fiercely flash’d against the face of Heav’n:
Pallas and Juno thund’ring from on high
In honour of Mycenæ’s wealthy lord.

Forthwith they order’d, each his charioteer,
To stay his car beside the ditch; themselves,
On foot, in arms accoutred, sallied forth,
And loud, ere early dawn, the clamour rose.
Advanc’d before the cars, they lin’d the ditch;
Follow’d the cars, a little space between:
But Jove with dire confusion fill’d their ranks,
Who sent from Heav’n a show’r of blood-stain’d rain.
In sign of many a warrior’s coming doom,
Soon to the viewless shades untimely sent.
Meanwhile upon the slope, beneath the plain,
The Trojan chiefs were gather’d; Hector’s self,
Polydamas, Æneas, as a God
In rev’rence held; Antenor’s three brave sons,
Agenor’s godlike presence, Polybus,
And, heav’nly fair, the youthful Acamas.
In front was seen the broad circumference
Of Hector’s shield; and as amid the clouds
Shines forth the fiery dog-star, bright and clear,
Anon beneath the cloudy veil conceal’d;
So now in front was Hector seen, and now
Pass’d to the rear, exhorting; all in brass,
His burnish’d arms like Jove’s own lightning flash’d.

As in the corn-land of some wealthy Lord
The rival bands of reapers mow the swathe,
Barley or wheat; and fast the trusses fall;
So Greeks and Trojans mow’d th’ opposing ranks;
Nor these admitted thought of faint retreat,
But still made even head; while those, like wolves,
Rush’d to the onset; Discord, Goddess dire,
Beheld, rejoicing; of the heav’nly pow’rs
She only mingled with the combatants;
The others all were absent; they, serene,
Repos’d in gorgeous palaces, for each
Amid Olympus’ deep recesses built.
Yet all the cloud-girt son of Saturn blam’d,
Who will’d the vict’ry to the arms of Troy.
He heeded not their anger; but withdrawn
Apart from all, in pride of conscious strength,
Survey’d the walls of Troy, the ships of Greece,
The flash of arms, the slayers and the slain.

While yet ’twas morn, and wax’d the youthful day,
Thick flew the shafts, and fast the people fell
On either side: but when the hour was come
When woodmen, in the forest’s deep recess,
Prepare their food, and wearied with the toil
Of felling loftiest trees, with aching arms
Turn with keen relish to their midday meal;
Then Grecian valour broke th’ opposing ranks,
As each along the line encourag’d each;
First sprang the monarch Agamemnon forth,
And brave Bienor slew, his people’s guard;
And, with the chief, his friend and charioteer,
Oileus; he, down-leaping from the car,
Stood forth defiant; but between his brows
The monarch’s spear was thrust; nor aught avail’d
The brass-bound helm, to stay the weapon’s point;
Through helm and bone it pass’d, and all the brain
Was shatter’d; forward as he rush’d, he fell.
Them left he there, their bare breasts gleaming white,
Stripp’d of their arms; and hasten’d in pursuit
Of Antiphus and Isus, Priam’s sons,
A bastard one, and one legitimate,
Both on one car; the bastard held the reins:
Beside him stood the gallant Antiphus.
Them, as they fed their flocks on Ida’s heights,
Achilles once had captive made, and bound
With willow saplings, till for ransom freed.
The mighty monarch, Agamemnon, drove
Through Isus’ breast his spear; his weighty sword
Descended on the head of Antiphus
Beside the ear, and hurl’d him from his car;
These of their armour he despoil’d in haste,
Known to him both; for he had seen them oft
Beside the ships, when thither captive brought
From Ida by Achilles, swift of foot.
As when a lion in their lair hath seiz’d
The helpless offspring of a mountain doe,
And breaks their bones with ease, and with strong teeth
Crushes their tender life; nor can their dam,
Though close at hand she be, avail them aught;
For she herself by deadly terror seiz’d,
Through the thick coppice and the forest flies,
Panting, and bath’d in sweat, the monster’s rush;
So dar’d no Trojan give those brethren aid,
Themselves in terror of the warlike Greeks.
Peisander next, and bold Hippolochus,
Sons of Antimachus (’twas he who chief,
Seduc’d by Paris’ gold and splendid gifts,
Advis’d the restitution to refuse
Of Helen to her Lord), the King assail’d;
Both on one car; but from their hands had dropp’d
The broider’d reins; bewilder’d there they stood;
While, with a lion’s bound, upon them sprang
The son of Atreus; suppliant, in the car,
They clasp’d his knees; “Give quarter, Atreus’ son,
Redeem our lives; our sire Antimachus
Possesses goodly store of brass and gold,
And well-wrought iron; and of these he fain
Would pay a noble ransom, could he hear
That in the Grecian ships we yet surviv’d.”

Thus they, with gentle words, and tears, imploring;
But all ungentle was the voice they heard
In answer; “If indeed ye be the sons
Of that Antimachus, who counsel gave,
When noble Menelaus came to Troy
With sage Ulysses, as ambassadors,
To slay them both, nor suffer their return,
Pay now the forfeit of your father’s guilt.”
He said, and with a spear-thrust through his breast
Peisander dash’d to earth; backward he fell.
Down leap’d Hippolochus; but Atreus’ son
Severing his hands and neck, amid the throng
Sent whirling like a bowl the gory head.
These left he there; and where the thickest throng
Maintain’d the tug of war, thither he flew,
And with him eager hosts of well-greav’d Greeks.
Soon on the Trojans’ flight enforc’d they hung,
Destroying; foot on foot, and horse on horse;
While from the plain thick clouds of dust arose
Beneath the armed hoofs of clatt’ring steeds;
And on the monarch Agamemnon press’d,
Still slaying, urging still the Greeks to arms.
As when amid a densely timber’d wood
Light the devouring flames, by eddying winds
Hither and thither borne, fast falls the copse
Prostrate beneath the fire’s impetuous course;
So thickly fell the flying Trojans’ heads
Beneath the might of Agamemnon’s arm;
And here and there, athwart the pass of war,
Was many an empty car at random whirl’d
By strong-neck’d steeds, of guiding hands bereft;
Stretch’d on the plain they lay, more welcome sight
To carrion birds than to their widow’d wives.
But Hector, from the fray and din of war,
And dust, and blood, and carnage, Jove withdrew.
Still on Atrides press’d, the Greek pursuit
With eager shouts exciting; past the tomb
Of Ilus, ancient son of Dardanus,
And tow’rd the fig-tree, midway o’er the plain,
Straining to gain the town, the Trojans fled;
While loudly shouting, his unconquer’d hands
With carnage dyed, Atrides urg’d their flight.
But when the Scaean gates and oak were reach’d,
They made a stand, and fac’d the foe’s assault.
Some o’er the open plain were yet dispers’d;
As heifers, by a lion scatter’d wide,
At dead of night; all fly; on one descends
The doom of death; her with his pow’rful teeth
He seizes, and, her neck first broken, rends,
And on her entrails gorging, laps her blood.
So these the monarch Agamemnon chas’d,
Slaying the hindmost; they in terror fled:
Some headlong, backward some, Atrides’ hand
Hurl’d from their chariot many a warrior bold;
So forward and so fierce he bore his spear.
But as he near’d the city, and stood beneath
The lofty wall, the Sire of Gods and men
From Heav’n descended; on the topmost height
Of Ida’s spring-abounding hill he sat:
And while his hand the lightning grasp’d, he thus
To golden-winged Iris gave command:

“Haste thee, swift Iris, and to Hector bear
From me this message; bid him, that as long
As Agamemnon in the van appears,
Raging, and dealing death among the ranks,
He from the battle keep himself aloof,
But urge the rest undaunted to maintain
The stubborn fight; but should Atrides, struck
By spear or arrow, to his car withdraw,
He shall from me receive such pow’r to slay,
As to the ships shall bear him, ere the sun
Decline, and Darkness spread her hallowing shade.”

Thus he; to Troy, obedient to his word,
From Ida’s heights swift-footed Iris sped:
Amid the horses and the well-fram’d cars
The godlike Hector, Priam’s son, she found,
And stood beside him, and address’d him thus:

“Hector, thou son of Priam, sage as Jove
In council, he the Universal Lord
Sends thee by me this message; that as long
As Agamemnon in the van appears,
Raging, and dealing death amid the ranks,
Thou from the battle keep thyself aloof,
But urge the rest undaunted to maintain
The stubborn fight; but should Atrides, struck
By spear or arrow, to his car withdraw,
Thou shalt from him receive such pow’r to slay
As to the ships shall bear thee, ere the sun
Decline, and Darkness spread her hallowing shade.”

Swift-footed Iris said, and disappear’d;
But from his chariot Hector leap’d to earth,
Hither and thither passing through the ranks,
With brandish’d jav’lins urging to the fight.
Loud, at his bidding, rose the battle-cry;
Back roll’d the tide; again they fac’d the Greeks:
On th’ other side the Greeks their masses form’d,
In line of battle rang’d; opposed they stood;
And in the front, to none content to cede
The foremost place, was Agamemnon seen.

Say now, ye Nine, who on Olympus dwell,
Of all the Trojans and their fam’d Allies,
Who first oppos’d to Agamemnon stood.
Iphidamas, Antenor’s gallant son,
Stalwart and brave; in fertile Thracia bred,
Mother of flocks; him, in his infant years,
His grandsire Cisseus, fair Theano’s sire,
In his own palace rear’d; and when he reach’d
The perfect measure of his glorious youth,
Still in his house retain’d him, and to wife
Gave him his daughter; but when tidings came
Of Grecian warfare, from the marriage straight
Embarking, with twelve beaked ships he sailed,
That owned his sway; these on Percote’s shore
He left; and came himself on foot to Troy;
Who now confronted Atreus’ godlike son.

When near they drew, Atrides miss’d his aim,
His spear diverging; then Iphidamas
Beneath the breastplate, striking on his belt,
Strove with strong hand to drive the weapon home:
Yet could not pierce the belt’s close-plaited work;
The point, encounter’d by the silver fold,
Was bent, like lead; then with his pow’rful hand
The monarch Agamemnon seiz’d the spear,
And tow’rd him drew, and with a lion’s strength
Wrench’d from his foeman’s grasp; then on his neck
Let fall his sword, and slack’d his limbs in death.
There, falling in his country’s cause, he slept
The iron sleep of death; unhappy he,
Far from his virgin-bride, yet unpossess’d,
Though bought with costly presents; first he gave
A hundred steers; and promis’d thousands more
Of sheep and goats from out his countless flocks.
Him Agamemnon of his arms despoil’d,
And to the crowd of Greeks the trophies bore.
But when Antenor’s eldest-born beheld,
Coon, th’ observ’d of all men, bitt’rest grief
His eyes o’ershadow’d, for his brother’s fate;
And, unperceiv’d by Atreus’ godlike son,
Standing aside, he struck him with his spear,
Through the mid arm, beneath the elbow’s bend;
And drove right through the weapon’s glitt’ring point.
Writh’d with the pain the mighty King of men;
Yet from the combat flinch’d he not, nor quail’d:
But grasping firm his weather-toughen’d spear
On Coon rush’d, as by the feet he drew
His father’s son, Iphidamas, away,
Invoking all the bravest to his aid;
And as he drew the body tow’rd the crowd,
Beneath the bossy shield the monarch thrust
His brass-clad spear, and slack’d his limbs in death;
Then near approaching, ev’n upon the corpse
Of dead Iphidamas, struck off his head:
So by Atrides’ hand, Antenor’s sons,
Their doom accomplish’d, to the shades were sent.
Then through the crowded ranks, with spear and sword,
And massive stones, he held his furious course,
While the hot blood was welling from his arm;
But when the wound was dry, and stanch’d the blood,
Keen anguish then Atrides’ might subdued.
As when a woman in her labour-throes
Sharp pangs encompass, by Lucina sent,
Who rules o’er child-birth travail, ev’n so keen
The pangs that then Atrides’ might subdued.
Mounting his car he bade his charioteer
Drive to the ships; for sore his spirit was pain’d;
But loud and clear he shouted to the Greeks:
“O friends, the chiefs and councillors of Greece,
Yours be it now our sea-borne ships to guard:
Since Jove, the Lord of counsel, through the day
Wills not that I the battle should maintain.”

He said: and swiftly to the ships were driv’n
His sleek-skinn’d coursers; nothing loth they flew;
With foam their chests were fleck’d, with dust their flanks,
As from the field their wounded Lord they bore:
But Hector, as he saw the King retire,
To Trojans and to Lycians call’d aloud:

“Trojans and Lycians, and ye Dardans fam’d
In close encounter, quit ye now like men;
Put forth your wonted valour; from the field
Their bravest has withdrawn, and Jove on me
Great glory hath shed; now headlong on the Greeks
Urge your swift steeds, and endless honour gain.”

His words fresh courage rous’d in ev’ry breast:
And as a hunter cheers his sharp-fang’d hounds
On forest boar or lion; on the Greeks
So cheer’d the valiant Trojans Priam’s son,
Illustrious Hector, stern as blood-stain’d Mars.
Bent on high deeds, himself in front advanc’d,
Fell on the masses as a whirlwind falls,
Lashing with furious sweep the dark-blue sea.

Say then, who first, who last, by Hector’s hand,
Whom Jove had will’d to crown with honour, died.
Assaeus first, and then Autonous,
Opites, and Opheltius, Dolops, son
Of Clytus, and Æsumnus, Agelas
And Orus, and brave Hipponous;
All these the chiefs of Greece; the nameless crowd
He scatter’d next; as when the west wind drives
The clouds, and battles with the hurricane,
Before the clearing blast of Notus driv’n;
The big waves heave and roll, and high aloft,
The gale, careering, flings the ocean spray;
So thick and furious fell on hostile heads
The might of Hector. Now had fearful deeds
Been done, and Greeks beside their ships had fall’n
In shameful rout, had not Ulysses thus
To Diomed, the son of Tydeus, call’d:

“Why, son of Tydeus, should we thus relax
Our warlike courage? come, stand by me now,
True friend! if Hector of the glancing helm
Our ships should capture, great were our disgrace.”

Whom answer’d thus the valiant Diomed:
“Beside thee will I stand, and still endure;
But brief will be the term of our success,
Since Jove, the Cloud-compeller, not to us,
But to the Trojans, wills the victory.”

He said, and from his car Thymbraeus hurl’d,
Through the left breast transfix’d: Ulysses’ hand
His charioteer, the brave Molion, slew.
These left they there, no more to share the fight;
Then turning, spread confusion ’mid the crowd:
As turn two boars upon the hunter’s pack
With desp’rate courage, turning so to bay,
Those two, the Trojans scatt’ring, gave the Greeks,
From Hector flying, time again to breathe.
A car they seiz’d which bore two valiant chiefs,
Sons of Percotian Merops; he, o’er all
In lore prophetic skill’d, would fain at home
Have kept them from the life-destroying war:
But they, by adverse fate impell’d to seek
Their doom of death, his warning voice despis’d.
These two, of strength and life at once bereft,
The son of Tydeus, valiant Diomed,
Stripp’d of their armour; while Ulysses slew
Hippodamus, and bold Hyperochus.
Thus Jove, from Ida’s height beholding, held
His even scale, each party slaught’ring each.
Then with his spear Tydides through the loins
Agastrophus, the son of Paeon, smote;
No car had he at hand, whereto to fly:
But, ill-advis’d, had in th’ attendants’ charge
His horses left far off; while he himself
Rush’d ’mid the throng on foot, and met his doom.
Hector’s quick glance athwart the files beheld,
And to the rescue, with a shout, he sprang,
The Trojan columns following; not unmov’d
The valiant Diomed his coming saw,
And thus bespoke Ulysses at his side:
“On us this plague, this mighty Hector, falls:
Yet stand we firm, and boldly meet the shock.”
He said, and, poising, hurl’d his pond’rous spear,
And not in vain; on Hector’s head it struck
His helmet’s crest, but, brass encount’ring brass,
Himself it reach’d not; for the visor’d helm,
Apollo’s gift, three-plated, stay’d its force.
Yet backward Hector sprang amid the crowd,
And on his knees he dropp’d, his stalwart hand
Propp’d on the ground; while darkness veil’d his eyes.
But ere Tydides, following up his spear,
Attain’d from far the spot whereon he fell,
Hector reviv’d, and mounting quick his car,
Drove ’mid the crowd, and ’scap’d the doom of death
Then thus, with threat’ning spear, Tydides cried:
“Yet once again, vile hound, hast thou escap’d;
Thy doom was nigh; but thee thy God hath sav’d,
Phoebus, to whom, amid the clash of spears,
Well mayst thou pray! We yet shall meet again;
When I shall end thee, if a guardian God
I too may claim; meanwhile from thee I turn,
And others seek on whom my hap may light.”

He said, and turn’d him of his arms to strip
The son of Paeon; but beside the stone
That mark’d where men of old had rais’d a mound
To Ilus, Dardan’s son, the ancient chief,
There crouching, Paris, fair-hair’d Helen’s Lord,
Against the son of Tydeus bent his bow.
He from the breast of brave Agastrophus
Had stripp’d the corslet; from his shoulders broad
The buckler, and the helmet from his head,
When Paris bent his bow, and not in vain
His arrow launch’d; Tydides’ dexter foot
Right through it pierc’d, and pinn’d it to the ground.
Joyous he laugh’d, and from his hiding place
Sprang forth, and thus in tones of triumph cried:

“Thou hast it! not in vain my shaft hath flown!
Would that, deep buried in thy flank, it touch’d
Thy very life! so should our Trojans lose
Their panic fear, who now on thee with dread,
As bleating goats upon a lion, look.”

To whom, unmov’d, the valiant Diomed:
“Poor archer, trusting to thy bow alone,
Vile sland’rer and seducer! if indeed
Thou durst in arms oppos’d to me to stand,
Nought would avail thy arrows and thy bow:
And now, because thy shaft hath graz’d my foot,
Thou mak’st thine empty boast: I heed thee not,
More than a woman or a puny child:
A worthless coward’s weapon hath no point.
’Tis diff’rent far with me! though light it fall,
My spear is sharp, and whom it strikes, it slays.
His widow’s cheeks are mark’d with scars of grief,
His children orphans; rotting on the ground,
Red with his blood, he lies, his fun’ral rites
By carrion birds, and not by women paid.”

Thus while he spoke, Ulysses, spearman bold,
Drew near, and stood before him; he, behind,
Sat down protected, and from out his foot
The arrow drew; whereat sharp anguish shot
Through all his flesh; and mounting on his car
He bade his faithful charioteer in haste
Drive to the ships, for pain weigh’d down his soul.
Alone Ulysses stood; of all the Greeks
Not one beside him; all were panic-struck:
Then with his spirit, perturb’d, he commun’d thus:
“Me miserable! which way shall I choose?
’Twere ill indeed that I should turn to flight
By hostile numbers daunted; yet ’twere worse
Here to be caught alone; and Saturn’s son
With panic fear the other Greeks hath fill’d.
Yet why, my soul, admit such thoughts as these?
I know that cowards from the battle fly;
But he who boasts a warrior’s name, must learn,
Wounded or wounding, firmly still to stand.”

While in his mind and spirit thus he mus’d,
Onward the buckler’d ranks of Trojans came,
And, to their harm, encircled him around.
As when a boar, by dogs and stalwart youths
Attack’d, the shelt’ring thicket leaves, and whets
The tusks that gleam between his curved jaws;
They crowd around, though ring his clatt’ring tusks,
And, fearful though it be, await his rush:
So crowded round Ulysses, dear to Jove,
The Trojans; he, with brandish’d spear aloft,
Sprang forth, and through the shoulder, from above,
Deiopites wounded: Thoon next
He slew, and Ennomus; then with his spear
Chersidamas, in act to quit his car,
Thrust through the loins below his bossy shield:
Prone in the dust, he clutch’d the blood-stain’d soil.
From these he turn’d; and wounded with his spear
Charops, the high-born Socus’ brother, son
Of Hippasus; then forward sprang, to aid
His brother, godlike Socus; close he stood
Before Ulysses, and address’d him thus:
“Far-fam’d Ulysses, as in arms, in wiles
Unwearied, thou this day o’er both the sons
Of Hippasus, two mighty warriors slain,
And of their armour spoil’d, shalt make thy boast,
Or by my spear thyself shalt lose thy life.”
He said, and on the shield’s broad circle struck:
Through the bright shield the sturdy weapon drove,
And through the rich-wrought baldrick, from the ribs
Tearing the flesh away; but Pallas seiz’d,
And turn’d it from the vital parts aside.
The wound, Ulysses knew, was not to death,
And back he drew, and thus to Socus cried:

“Ill-fated thou! thy doom hath found thee now;
Me hast thou hinder’d from the war awhile;
But thee to swift destruction and dark death,
This day I doom: great glory, of thee subdued,
Shall I obtain, and Hades take thy soul.”

Thus he: and Socus, turning, sought to fly;
But as he turn’d him round, Ulysses’ spear
Behind his neck, between the shoulder blades
Was driv’n, and through his chest; thund’ring he fell,
And o’er his fall Ulysses, vaunting, thus:

“Socus, thou son of warlike Hippasus,
Here hast thou found, nor couldst escape, thy doom.
Ill-fated thou! nor sire’s nor mother’s hand
Shall gather up thy bones, but carrion birds
O’er thee shall flap their baleful wings, and tear
Thy mangled flesh; for me, whene’er I die
The sons of Greece will build my fun’ral pile.”
From out his flesh, and from the bossy shield,
The spear of Socus, as he spoke, he drew;
And as he drew it forth, out gush’d his blood,
With anguish keen. The Trojans, when they saw
Ulysses’ blood, with clam’rous shouts advanc’d
Promiscuous; he, retiring, shouted loud
To call his comrades; loud as head of man
Could bear, he shouted thrice; and thrice his shout
The warlike Menelaus heard, and thus
To Ajax, standing by his side, he spoke:

“Ajax, thou Heav’n-born son of Telamon,
Great chief of men, methinks I hear the voice
Of stout Ulysses, as though left alone,
And in the stubborn fight cut off from aid,
By Trojans overmaster’d. Haste we then,
For so ’twere best, to give him present aid.
Brave though he be, yet left alone, I fear
Great cause we Greeks may have to mourn his loss.”

He spoke, and led the way; the godlike chief
Follow’d his steps: Ulysses, dear to Jove,
Surrounded by the Trojan host they found,
As hungry jackals on the mountain side
Around a stag, that from an archer’s hand
Hath taken hurt, yet while his blood was warm
And limbs yet serv’d, has baffled his pursuit;
But when the fatal shaft has drain’d his strength,
Thirsting for blood, beneath the forest shade,
The jackals seize their victim; then if chance
A hungry lion pass, the jackals shrink
In terror back, while he devours the prey;
So round Ulysses, sage in council, press’d
The Trojans, many and brave, yet nobly he
Averted, spear in hand, the fatal hour;
Till, with his tow’r-like shield before him borne,
Appear’d great Ajax, and beside him stood.
Hither and thither then the Trojans fled;
While with supporting arm from out the crowd
The warlike Menelaus led him forth,
Till his attendant with his car drew near.
Then Ajax, on the Trojans springing, slew
Doryclus, royal Priam’s bastard son;
Next Pyrasus he smote, and Pandocus,
Lysander, and Pylartes; as a stream,
Swoll’n by the rains of Heav’n, that from the hills
Pours down its wintry torrent on the plain;
And many a blighted oak, and many a pine
It bears, with piles of drift-wood, to the sea
So swept illustrious Ajax o’er the plain,
O’erthrowing men and horses; though unknown
To Hector; he, upon Scamander’s banks
Was warring on the field’s extremest left,
Where round great Nestor and the warlike King
Idomeneus, while men were falling fast,
Rose, irrepressible, the battle cry.
Hector, ’mid these, was working wondrous deeds,
With spear and car, routing th’ opposed youth;
Yet had the Greeks ev’n so their ground maintain’d,
But godlike Paris, fair-hair’d Helen’s Lord,
Through the right shoulder, with a three-barb’d shaft,
As in the front he fought, Machaon quell’d:
For him the warrior Greeks were sore afraid
Lest he, as back the line of battle roll’d,
Might to the foe be left; to Nestor then
Idomeneus address’d his speech, and said:

“O Nestor, son of Neleus, pride of Greece,
Haste thee to mount thy car, and with thee take
Machaon; tow’rd the vessels urge with speed
The flying steeds; worth many a life is his,
The skilful leech, who knows, with practis’d hand,
T’ extract the shaft, and healing drugs apply.”

He said: Gerenian Nestor at the word
Mounted his car, Machaon at his side,
The skilful leech, sage Æsculapius’ son:
He touch’d his horses; tow’rd the Grecian ships,
As was his purpose, nothing loth, they flew.

To Hector then Cebriones, who saw
Confus’d the Trojans’ right, drew near, and said:

“Hector, we here, on th’ outskirts of the field,
O’erpow’r the Greeks; on th’ other side, our friends
In strange confusion mingled, horse and man,
Are driv’n; among them Ajax spreads dismay,
The son of Telamon; I know him well,
And the broad shield that o’er his shoulders hangs;
Thither direct we then our car, where most
In mutual slaughter horse and foot engage,
And loudest swells, uncheck’d, the battle cry.”

He said, and with the pliant lash he touch’d
The sleek-skinn’d horses; springing at the sound,
Between the Greeks and Trojans, light they bore
The flying car, o’er bodies of the slain
And broken bucklers trampling; all beneath
Was plash’d with blood the axle, and the rails
Around the car, as from the horses’ feet,
And from the felloes of the wheels, were thrown
The bloody gouts; yet on he sped, to join
The strife of men, and break th’ opposing ranks.
His coming spread confusion ’mid the Greeks,
His spear awhile withheld; then through the rest,
With sword, and spear, and pond’rous stones he rush’d,
But shunn’d the might of Ajax Telamon.

But Jove, high thron’d, the soul of Ajax fill’d
With fear; aghast he stood; his sev’nfold shield
He threw behind his back, and, trembling, gaz’d
Upon the crowd; then, like some beast of prey,
Foot slowly following foot, reluctant turn’d.
As when the rustic youths and dogs have driv’n
A tawny lion from the cattle fold,
Watching all night, and baulk’d him of his prey;
Rav’ning for flesh, he still th’ attempt renews,
But still in vain: for many a jav’lin, hurl’d
By vig’rous arms, confronts him to his face,
And blazing faggots, that his courage daunt;
Till, with the dawn, reluctant he retreat:
So from before the Trojans Ajax turn’d,
Reluctant, fearing for the ships of Greece.
As near a field of corn, a stubborn ass,
Upon whose sides had many a club been broke,
O’erpow’rs his boyish guides, and ent’ring in,
On the rich forage grazes; while the boys
Their cudgels ply, but vain their puny strength,
Yet drive him out, when fully fed, with ease:
Ev’n so great Ajax, son of Telamon,
The valiant Trojans and their fam’d Allies,
Still thrusting at his shield, before them drove:
Yet would he sometimes, rallying, hold in check
The Trojan host; then turn again to flight,
Yet barring still the passage to the ships.
Midway between the Trojans and the Greeks
He stood defiant; many jav’lins, hurl’d
By vig’rous arms, were in their flight receiv’d
On his broad shield; and many, ere they reach’d
Their living mark, fell midway on the plain,
Fix’d in the ground, in vain athirst for blood.
Him thus, hard press’d by thick-thrown spears, beheld
Eurypylus, Euaemon’s noble son.
He hasten’d up, and aim’d his glitt’ring spear;
And Apisaon, Phausias’ noble son,
Below the midriff through the liver struck,
And straight relax’d in sudden death his limbs.
Forth sprang Eurypylus to seize the spoils:
But godlike Paris saw, and as he stoop’d
From Apisaon’s corpse to strip his arms,
Against Eurypylus he bent his bow,
And his right thigh transfix’d; the injur’d limb
Disabling, in the wound the arrow broke.
He ’mid his friends, escaping death, withdrew,
And to the Greeks with piercing shout he call’d:

“O friends, the chiefs and councillors of Greece,
Turn yet again, and from the doom of death
Great Ajax save, hard press’d by hostile spears:
Scarce can I hope he may escape with life
The desp’rate fight; yet bravely stand, and aid
The mighty Ajax, son of Telamon.”

Thus spoke the wounded hero: round him they
With sloping shields and spears uplifted stood:
Ajax to meet them came; and when he reach’d
The friendly ranks, again he turn’d to bay.
So rag’d, like blazing fire, the furious fight.

Meanwhile the mares of Neleus, drench’d with sweat,
Bore Nestor and Machaon from the field;
Achilles saw, and mark’d them where he stood
Upon his lofty vessel’s prow, and watch’d
The grievous toil, the lamentable rout.
Then on his friend Patroclus from the ship
He call’d aloud; he heard his voice, and forth,
As Mars majestic, from the tent he came:
(That day commenc’d his evil destiny)
And thus Menoetius’ noble son began:

“Why call’st thou me? what wouldst thou, Peleus’ son?”
To whom Achilles, swift of foot, replied:
“Son of Menoetius, dearest to my soul,
Soon, must the suppliant Greeks before me kneel,
So insupportable is now their need.
But haste thee now, Patroclus, dear to Jove:
Enquire of Nestor, from the battle field
Whom brings he wounded: looking from behind
Most like he seem’d to Æsculapius’ son,
Machaon; but his face I could not see,
So swiftly past the eager horses flew.”

He said: obedient to his friend’s command,
Quick to the tents and ships Patroclus ran.

They, when they reach’d the tent of Neleus’ son,
Descended to the ground; Eurymedon
The old man’s mares unharness’d from the car,
While on the beach they fac’d the cooling breeze,
Which from their garments dried the sweat; then turn’d,
And in the tent on easy seats repos’d.
For them the fair-hair’d Hecamede mix’d
A cordial potion; her from Tenedos,
When by Achilles ta’en, the old man brought;
Daughter of great Arsinous, whom the Greeks
On him, their sagest councillor, bestow’d.
Before them first a table fair she spread,
Well polish’d, and with feet of solid bronze;
On this a brazen canister she plac’d,
And onions, as a relish to the wine,
And pale clear honey, and pure barley meal:
By these a splendid goblet, which from home
Th’ old man had brought, with golden studs adorn’d:
Four were its handles, and round each two doves
Appear’d to feed; at either end, a cup.
Scarce might another move it from the board,
When full; but aged Nestor rais’d with ease.
In this, their goddess-like attendant first
A gen’rous measure mix’d of Pramnian wine:
Then with a brazen grater shredded o’er
The goatsmilk cheese, and whitest barley meal,
And of the draught compounded bade them drink.
They drank, and then, reliev’d the parching thirst,
With mutual converse entertain’d the hour.
Before the gate divine Patroclus stood:
The old man saw, and from his seat arose,
And took him by the hand, and led him in,
And bade him sit; but he, refusing, said:

“No seat for me, thou venerable sire!
I must not stay; for he both awe and fear
Commands, who hither sent me to enquire
What wounded man thou hast; I need not ask,
I know Machaon well, his people’s guard.
My errand done, I must my message bear
Back to Achilles; and thou know’st thyself,
Thou venerable sire, how stern his mood:
Nay sometimes blames he, where no blame is due.”

To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied:
“Whence comes Achilles’ pity for the Greeks
By Trojan weapons wounded? knows he not
What depth of suff’ring through the camp prevails?
How in the ships, by arrow or by spear
Sore wounded, all our best and bravest lie?
The valiant son of Tydeus, Diomed,
Pierc’d by a shaft; Ulysses by a spear,
And Agamemnon’s self; Eurypylus
By a sharp arrow through the thigh transfix’d;
And here another, whom but now I bring,
Shot by a bow, from off the battle field:
Achilles, valiant as he is, the while
For Grecian woes nor care nor pity feels.
Waits he, until our ships beside the sea,
In our despite, are burnt by hostile fires,
And we be singly slain? not mine is now
The strength I boasted once of active limbs.
O that such youth and vigour yet were mine,
As when about a cattle-lifting raid
We fought th’ Eleans; there Itymoneus
I slew, the son of brave Hyperochus,
Who dwelt in Elis; and my booty drove.
He sought to guard the herd; but from my hand
A jav’lin struck him in the foremost ranks:
He fell, and terror seiz’d the rustic crowd.
Abundant store of plunder from the plain
We drove: of horned cattle fifty herds;
As many flocks of sheep, as many droves
Of swine, as many wide-spread herds of goats,
And thrice so many golden-chesnut mares,
The foals of many running with their dams.
To Pylos, Neleus’ city, these we drove
By night; and much it gladden’d Neleus’ heart,
That I, though new to war, such prize had won.
When morn appear’d, the clear-voic’d heralds call’d
For all to whom from Elis debts were due;
Collected thus, the Pylians’ leading men
Division made: for Elis ow’d us much;
Such wrongs we few in Pylos had sustain’d.
The might of Hercules in former years
Had storm’d our town, and all our bravest slain.
Twelve gallant sons had Neleus; I of these
Alone was left; the others all were gone.
Whence over-proud, th’ Epeians treated us
With insult, and high-handed violence.
A herd of oxen now, and num’rous flock
Of sheep, th’ old man selected for himself,
Three hundred, with their shepherds; for to him
Large compensation was from Elis due.
Train’d to the course, four horses, with their cars,
He for the Tripod at th’ Elean games
Had sent to run; these Augeas, King of men,
Detain’d, and bade the drivers home return,
Bootless, and grieving for their horses’ loss.
Th’ old man his words resenting, and his acts,
Large spoils retain’d; the rest among the crowd
He shar’d, that none might lose his portion due.
These we dispos’d of soon, and to the Gods
Due off’rings made; but when the third day rose,
Back in all haste, in numbers, horse and foot,
Our foes return’d; with, them the Molion twins,
Yet boys, untutor’d in the arts of war.
Far off, by Alpheus’ banks, th’ extremest verge
Of sandy Pylos, is a lofty mound,
The city of Thryum; which around, intent
To raze its walls, their army was encamp’d.
The plain already they had overspread;
When Pallas from Olympus’ heights came down
In haste, and bade us all prepare for war.
On no unwilling ears her message fell,
But eager all for fight; but me, to arm
Neleus forbade, and e’en my horses hid,
Deeming me yet unripe for deeds of war.
Yet so, albeit on foot, by Pallas’ grace
A name I gain’d above our noblest horse.
There is a river, Minyis by name,
Hard by Arene, flowing to the sea,
Where we, the Pylian horse, expecting morn,
Encamp’d, by troops of footmen quickly join’d.
Thence in all haste advancing, all in arms,
We reach’d, by midday, Alpheus’ sacred stream.
There, to o’erruling Jove our off’rings made,
To Alpheus and to Neptune each a bull,
To Pallas, blue-ey’d Maid, a heifer fair,
In order’d ranks we took our ev’ning meal,
And each in arms upon the river’s brink
Lay down to rest; for close beside us lay
Th’ Epeians, on the town’s destruction bent.
Then saw they mighty deeds of war display’d;
For we, as sunlight overspread the earth,
To Jove and Pallas praying, battle gave.
But when the Pylians and th’ Epeians met,
I first a warrior slew, and seiz’d his car,
Bold spearman, Mulius; Augeas’ son-in-law,
His eldest daughter’s husband, Agamede,
The yellow-hair’d, who all the virtues knew
Of each medicinal herb the wide world grows.
Him, with my brass-tipp’d spear, as on he came,
I slew; he fell; I, rushing to his car,
Stood ’mid the foremost ranks; th’ Epeians brave
Fled diverse, when they saw their champion fall,
Chief of their horsemen, foremost in the fight.
With the dark whirlwind’s force, I onward rush’d,
And fifty cars I took; two men in each
Fell to my spear, and bit the bloody dust.
Then Actor’s sons, the Molions, had I slain,
Had not th’ Earth-shaking God, their mighty sire,
Veil’d in thick cloud, withdrawn them from the field;
Then Jove great glory to the Pylians gave.
For o’er the wide-spread plain we held pursuit,
Slaying, and gath’ring up the scatter’d arms,
Nor till corn-clad Buprasium, and the rock
Olenian, and Alesium, term’d the Mound,
Stay’d we our steeds; there Pallas bade us turn.
There the last man I slew, and left; the Greeks
Back from Buprasium drove their flying cars
To Pylos, magnifying all the name,
’Mid men, of Nestor, as ’mid Gods, of Jove.
Such once was I ’mid men, while yet I was;
Now to himself alone Achilles keeps
His valour; yet hereafter, when the Greeks
Have perish’d all, remorse shall touch his soul.
Dear friend, remember now th’ injunctions giv’n
By old Menoetius, when from Phthian land
He sent thee forth to Agamemnon’s aid:
I, and Laertes’ godlike son, within,
Heard all his counsel; to the well-built house
Of Peleus we on embassy had come,
Throughout Achaia’s fertile lands to raise
The means of war; Menoetius there we found,
Achilles, and thyself within the house;
While in the court-yard aged Peleus slew,
And to the Lord of thunder offer’d up
A fatten’d steer; and from a golden bowl
O’er the burnt-off’ring pour’d the ruddy wine.
We two, while ye were busied with the flesh,
Stood at the gate; surpris’d, Achilles rose,
And took us by the hand, and bade us sit,
Dispensing all the hospitable rites.
With food and wine recruited, I began
My speech, and urg’d ye both to join the war:
Nor were ye loth to go; much sage advice
Your elders gave; old Peleus bade his son
To aim at highest honours, and surpass
His comrades all; Menoetius, Actor’s son,
To thee this counsel gave: ‘My son,’ he said,
‘Achilles is by birth above thee far;
Thou art in years the elder; he in strength
Surpasses thee; do thou with prudent words
And timely speech address him, and advise
And guide him; he will, to his good, obey.’

“Such were the old man’s words; but thou hast let
His counsel slip thy mem’ry; yet ev’n now
Speak to Achilles thus, and stir his soul,
If haply he will hear thee; and who knows
But by the grace of Heav’n thou mayst prevail?
For great is oft a friend’s persuasive pow’r.
But if the fear of evil prophesied,
Or message by his Goddess-mother brought
From Jove, restrain him, let him send thee forth
With all his force of warlike Myrmidons,
That thou mayst be the saving light of Greece.
Then let him bid thee to the battle bear
His glitt’ring arms; if so the men of Troy,
Scar’d by his likeness, may forsake the field,
And breathing-time afford the sons of Greece,
Toil-worn; for little pause has yet been theirs.
Fresh and unwearied, ye with ease may drive
To their own city, from our ships and tents,
The Trojans, worn and battle-wearied men.”

Thus he; Patroclus’ spirit within him burn’d,
And tow’rd Achilles’ tent in haste he sped.
But, running, as Ulysses’ ship he pass’d,
Where was the Council and the Justice-seat,
And where were built the altars of the Gods,
There met him, halting from the battle-field,
Shot through the thigh, Euaemon’s Heav’n-born son,
Eurypylus; his head and shoulders dank
With clammy sweat, while from his grievous wound
Stream’d the dark blood; yet firm was still his soul.
Menoetius’ noble son with pity saw,
And deeply sorrowing thus address’d the chief:

“Woe for the chiefs and councillors of Greece!
And must ye, far from friends and native home,
Glut with your flesh the rav’ning dogs of Troy?
Yet tell me this, Heav’n-born Eurypylus;
Still do the Greeks ’gainst Hector’s giant force
Make head? or fall they, vanquish’d by his spear?”

To whom with prudent speech, Eurypylus:
“No source, Heav’n-born Patroclus, have the Greeks,
Of aid, but all must perish by their ships:
For in the ships lie all our bravest late,
By spear or arrow struck, by Trojan hands;
And fiercer, hour by hour, their onset grows.
But save me now, and lead me to the ships;
There cut the arrow out, and from the wound
With tepid water cleanse the clotted blood:
Then soothing drugs apply, of healing pow’r,
Which from Achilles, thou, ’tis said, hast learn’d,
From Chiron, justest of the Centaurs, he.
For Podalirius and Machaon both,
Our leeches, one lies wounded in the tents,
Himself requiring sore the leech’s aid;
The other on the plain still dares the fight.”

To whom again Menoetius’ noble son:
“How may this be? say, brave Eurypylus,
What must I do? a messenger am I,
Sent by Gerenian Nestor, prop of Greece,
With tidings to Achilles; yet ev’n so
I will not leave thee in this weary plight.”

He said, and passing his supporting hand
Beneath his breast, the wounded warrior led
Within the tent; th’ attendant saw, and spread
The ox-hide couch; then as he lay reclin’d,
Patroclus, with his dagger, from the thigh
Cut out the biting shaft; and from the wound
With tepid water cleans’d the clotted blood;
Then, pounded in his hands, a root applied
Astringent, anodyne, which all his pain
Allay’d; the wound was dried, and stanch’d the blood.





Thus o’er the wounded chief Eurypylus
Watch’d in his tent Menoetius’ noble son;
But hand to hand the Greeks and Trojans fought;
Nor longer might the ditch th’ assault repel,
Nor the broad wall above, which Greeks had built,
To guard their ships, and round it dug the ditch;
But to the Gods no hecatombs had paid,
That they the ships and all the stores within
Might safely keep; against the will of Heav’n
The work was done, and thence not long endur’d.
While Hector liv’d, and Peleus’ son his wrath
Retain’d, and Priam’s city untaken stood;
So long the Grecian wall remain’d entire:
But of the Trojans when the best had fall’n,
Of Greeks, when some were slain, some yet surviv’d;
When the tenth year had seen the fall of Troy,
And Greeks, embark’d, had ta’en their homeward way,
Then Neptune and Apollo counsel took
To sap the wall by aid of all the streams
That seaward from the heights of Ida flow;
Rhesus, Caresus, and Heptaporus,
Granicus, and Æsepus, Rhodius,
Scamander’s stream divine, and Simois,
Where helms and shields lay buried in the sand,
And a whole race of warrior demigods:
These all Apollo to one channel turn’d;
Nine days against the wall the torrent beat;
And Jove sent rain continuous, that the wall
Might sooner be submerg’d; while Neptune’s self,
His trident in his hand, led on the stream,
Washing away the deep foundations, laid,
Laborious, by the Greeks, with logs and stones,
Now by fast-flowing Hellespont dispers’d.
The wall destroy’d, o’er all the shore he spread
A sandy drift; and bade the streams return
To where of old their silver waters flow’d.
Such were, in future days, to be the works
Of Neptune and Apollo; but meanwhile
Fierce rag’d the battle round the firm-built wall,
And frequent clatter’d on the turrets’ beams
The hostile missiles: by the scourge of Jove
Subdued, the Greeks beside their ships were hemm’d,
By Hector scar’d, fell minister of Dread,
Who with the whirlwind’s force, as ever, fought.
As when, by dogs and hunters circled round,
A boar, or lion, in his pride of strength,
Turns on his foes, while they in close array
Stand opposite, and frequent shoot their darts;
Nor yet his spirit quails, but firm he stands
With suicidal courage; swift he turns,
Where best to break the circling ranks; where’er
He makes his rush, the circling ranks give way:
So Hector, here and there, amid the crowd,
Urg’d his companions on to cross the ditch:
The fiery steeds shrank back, and, snorting, stood
Upon the topmost brink; for the wide ditch
Withheld them, easy nor to leap nor cross:
For steep arose on either side the banks,
And at the top with sharpen’d stakes were crown’d,
Thick-set and strong, which there the sons of Greece
Had planted, to repel th’ invading foes.
Scarce might a horse, with well-wheel’d car attach’d,
Essay the passage; but on foot they burn’d
To make th’ attempt; and thus Polydamas,
Approaching near, to valiant Hector spoke:

“Hector, and all ye other chiefs of Troy,
And brave Allies, in vain we seek to drive
Our horses o’er the ditch; ’tis hard to cross;
’Tis crown’d with pointed stakes, and them behind
Is built the Grecian wall; there to descend
And from our cars in narrow space to fight
Were certain ruin. If it be indeed
The will of Jove, high-thund’ring, to confound
The Greeks in utter rout, and us to aid,
I should rejoice that ev’ry Greek forthwith
Far from his home should fill a nameless grave;
But should they turn, and we again be driv’n
Back from the ships, and hurried down the ditch,
Such were our loss, that scarce a messenger
Would live to bear the tidings to the town
Of our destruction by the rallied Greeks.
Hear then my counsel; let us all agree
With our attendants here upon the bank
To leave our horses; and ourselves on foot,
All arm’d, press on where Hector leads; the Greeks,
If that their doom be nigh, will make no stand.”

Thus spoke Polydamas; his counsel pleas’d;
And Hector sprang, in arms, from off his car;
Nor long, the noble Hector when they saw,
Delay’d the other chiefs; then gave command
Each to his own attendant, by the ditch
To keep the chariots all in due array;
Then parting, form’d in order of attack,
In five divisions, with their sev’ral chiefs.
Round Hector throng’d, and bold Polydamas,
The best and bravest; they who long’d the most
To storm the wall, and fight beside the ships.
With them Cebriones; for Hector left,
To guard the horses, one of lesser note.
The next division was by Paris led,
Agenor, and Alcathous; the third
By Helenus, and brave Deiphobus,
Two sons of Priam; Asius was the third,
Asius, the son of Hyrtacus; who brought
His tow’ring fiery steeds from Selles’ stream,
Hard by Arisba; stout Æneas led
The fourth, Anchises’ son, Archilochus
With him, and Acamas, Antenor’s sons;
Both skill’d alike in ev’ry point of war.
Of the far-fam’d Allies, Sarpedon held
The chief command; and for his comrades chose
Asteropaeus, and the warlike might
Of Glaucus; these o’er all the rest he held
Pre-eminent in valour, save himself,
Who o’er them all superior stood confess’d.
These, interlac’d their shields of tough bull’s-hide,
With eager step advanc’d, and deem’d the Greeks
Would, unresisting, fall before their ships.
The other Trojans and renown’d Allies
The words of wise Polydamas obey’d:
But Asius, son of Hyrtacus, refus’d
His horses and his charioteer to leave,
With them advancing to assail the ships.
Blind fool, unconscious! from before those ships,
Escap’d from death, with horses and with car
Triumphant, to the breezy heights of Troy
He never shall return; ill-omen’d fate
O’ershadowing, dooms him by the spear to fall
Of brave Idomeneus, Deucalion’s son.
He tow’rd the left inclin’d, what way the Greeks
With horse and chariot from the plain return’d.
That way he drove his horses; and the gates
Unguarded found by bolt or massive bar.
Their warders held them open’d wide, to save
Perchance some comrade, flying from the plain.
Thither he bent his course; with clamours loud
Follow’d his troops; nor deem’d they that the Greeks
Would hold their ground, but fall amid their ships.
Little they knew; before the gates they found
Two men, two warriors of the prime, two sons
Illustrious of the spear-skill’d Lapithae:
Stout Polypoetes one, Pirithous’ son,
With whom Leonteus, bold as blood-stain’d Mars:
So stood these two before the lofty gates,
As on the mountain side two tow’ring oaks,
Which many a day have borne the wind and storm,
Firm rifted by their strong continuous roots:
So in their arms and vigour confident
Those two great Asius’ charge, undaunted, met.
On th’ other side, with, shouts and wild uproar,
Their bull’s-hide shields uplifted high, advanc’d
Against the well-built wall, Asius the King,
Iamenus, Orestes, Acamas
The son of Asius, and Œnomaus,
And Thoon; those within to save the ships
Calling meanwhile on all the well-greav’d Greeks;
But when they saw the wall by Trojans scal’d,
And heard the cry of Greeks in panic fear,
Sprang forth those two, before the gates to fight.
As when two boars, upon the mountain side,
Await th’ approaching din of men and dogs,
Then sideways rushing, snap the wood around,
Ripp’d from the roots; loud clash their clatt’ring tusks,
Till to the huntsman’s spear they yield their lives;
So clatter’d on those champions’ brass-clad breasts
The hostile weapons; stubbornly they fought,
Relying on their strength, and friends above:
For from the well-built tow’rs huge stones were hurl’d
By those who for themselves, their tents and ships,
Maintain’d defensive warfare; thick they fell,
As wintry snow-flakes, which the boist’rous wind,
Driving the shadowy clouds, spreads fast and close
O’er all the surface of the fertile earth:
So thick, from Grecian and from Trojan hands,
The weapons flew; on helm and bossy shield
With grating sound the pond’rous masses rang.
Then deeply groaning, as he smote his thigh
Thus spoke dismay’d the son of Hyrtacus:
“O Father Jove, how hast thou lov’d our hopes
To falsify, who deem’d not that the Greeks
Would stand our onset, and resistless arms!
But they, as yellow-banded wasps, or bees,
That by some rocky pass have built their nests,
Abandon not their cavern’d home, but wait
Th’ attack, and boldly for their offspring fight;
So from the gates these two, though two alone,
Retire not, till they be or ta’en or slain.”

He said: but Jove regarded not his words;
So much on Hector’s triumph he was bent.
Like battle rag’d round th’ other gates; but hard
It were for me, with godlike pow’r, to paint
Each sev’ral combat; for around the wall
A more than human storm of stone was pour’d
On ev’ry side; the Greeks, hard press’d, perforce
Fought for their ships, while all the Gods look’d on
Indignant, who the Grecian cause upheld.
Fiercely the Lapithae sustain’d the war:
Stout Polypoetes first, Pirithous’ son,
Smote, through the brass-cheek’d helmet, Damasus;
Nor stay’d the brazen helm the spear, whose point
Went crashing through the bone, that all the brain
Was shatter’d; onward as he rush’d, he fell.
Then Pylon next, and Ormenus he slew:
Meantime Leonteus, scion true of Mars,
Struck with unerring spear Hippomachus,
Son of Antimachus, below the waist;
Then, drawing from the sheath his trenchant sword,
Dash’d through the crowd, and hand to hand he smote
Antiphates; he, backward, fell to earth.
Menon, Iamenus, Orestes next,
In quick succession to the ground he brought.
From these while they their glitt’ring armour stripp’d,
Round Hector throng’d, and bold Polydamas,
The bravest and the best, who long’d the most
To storm the wall, and burn with fire the ships.
Yet on the margin of the ditch they paus’d;
For, as they sought to cross, a sign from Heav’n
Appear’d, to leftward of th’ astonish’d crowd;
A soaring eagle in his talons bore
A dragon, huge of size, of blood-red hue,
Alive, and breathing still, nor yet subdued;
For twisting backward through the breast he pierc’d
His bearer, near the neck; he, stung with pain,
Let fall his prey, which dropp’d amid the crowd;
Then screaming, on the blast was borne away.
The Trojans, shudd’ring, in their midst beheld
The spotted serpent, dire portent of Jove:
Then to bold Hector thus Polydamas:
“Hector, in council thou reprov’st me oft
For good advice; it is not meet, thou say’st,
That private men should talk beside the mark,
In council or in war, but study still
Thine honour to exalt; yet must I now
Declare what seems to me the wisest course:
Let us not fight the Greeks beside their ships;
For thus I read the future, if indeed
To us, about to cross, this sign from Heav’n
Was sent, to leftward of th’ astonish’d crowd:
A soaring eagle, bearing in his claws
A dragon, huge of size, of blood-red hue,
Alive; yet dropp’d him ere he reach’d his home,
Nor to his nestlings bore th’ intended prey:
So we, e’en though our mighty strength should break
The gates and wall, and put the Greeks to rout,
By the same road not scatheless should return,
But many a Trojan on the field should leave,
Slain by the Greeks, while they their ships defend.
So would a seer, well vers’d in augury,
Worthy of public credit, read this sign.”

To whom thus Hector of the glancing helm
Replied, with stern regard: “Polydamas,
This speech of thine is alien to my soul:
Thy better judgment better counsel knows.
But if in earnest such is thine advice,
Thee of thy senses have the Gods bereft,
Who fain wouldst have us disregard the word
And promise by the nod of Jove confirm’d,
And put our faith in birds’ expanded wings;
Little of these I reck, nor care to look,
If to the right, and tow’rd the morning sun,
Or to the left, and shades of night, they fly.
Put we our trust in Jove’s eternal will,
Of mortals and Immortals King supreme.
The best of omens is our country’s cause.
Why shouldst thou tremble at the battle strife?
Though ev’ry Trojan else were doom’d to die
Beside the ships, no fear lest thou shouldst fall:
Unwarlike is thy soul, nor firm of mood:
But if thou shrink, or by thy craven words
Turn back another Trojan from the fight,
My spear shall take the forfeit of thy life.”

This said, he led the way; with joyous shouts
They follow’d all; then Jove, the lightning’s Lord,
From Ida’s heights a storm of wind sent down,
Driving the dust against the Grecian ships;
Which quell’d their courage, and to Hector gave,
And to the Trojans, fresh incitement; they,
On their own strength, and heav’nly signs relying,
Their force address’d to storm the Grecian wall.
They raz’d the counterscarp, the battlements
Destroy’d; and the projecting buttresses,
Which, to sustain the tow’rs, the Greeks had fix’d
Deep in the soil, with levers undermin’d.
These once withdrawn, they hop’d to storm the wall;
Nor from the passage yet the Greeks withdrew,
But closely fencing with their bull’s-hide shields
The broken battlements, they thence hurl’d down
A storm of weapons on the foe beneath.
Commanding from the tow’r in ev’ry place
Were seen th’ Ajaces, urging to the fight,
Imploring these, and those in sterner tones
Rebuking, who their warlike toil relax’d.

“Friends, Grecians all, ye who excel in war,
And ye of mod’rate or inferior strength,
Though all are not with equal pow’rs endued,
Yet here is work for all! bear this in mind,
Nor tow’rd the ships let any turn his face,
By threats dismay’d; but forward press, and each
Encourage each, if so the lightning’s Lord,
Olympian Jove, may grant us to repel,
And backward to his city chase the foe.”

Thus they, with cheering words, sustain’d the war:
Thick as the snow-flakes on a wintry day,
When Jove, the Lord of counsel, down on men
His snow-storm sends, and manifests his pow’r:
Hush’d are the winds; the flakes continuous fall,
That the high mountain tops, and jutting crags,
And lotus-cover’d meads are buried deep,
And man’s productive labours of the field;
On hoary Ocean’s beach and bays they lie,
Th’ approaching waves their bound; o’er all beside
Is spread by Jove the heavy veil of snow.
So thickly new the stones from either side,
By Greeks on Trojans hurl’d, by these on Greeks;
And clatter’d loud through all its length the wall.
Nor yet the Trojans, though by Hector led,
The gates had broken, and the massive bar,
But Jove against the Greeks sent forth his son
Sarpedon, as a lion on a herd:
His shield’s broad orb before his breast he bore,
Well-wrought, of beaten brass, which th’ arm’rer’s hand
Had beaten out, and lin’d with stout bull’s-hide;
With golden rods, continuous, all around;
He thus equipp’d, two jav’lins brandishing,
Strode onward, as a lion, mountain-bred,
Whom, fasting long, his dauntless courage leads
To assail the flock, though in well-guarded fold;
And though the shepherds there he find, prepar’d
With dogs and lances to protect the sheep,
Not unattempted will he leave the fold;
But, springing to the midst, he bears his prey
In triumph thence; or in the onset falls,
Wounded by jav’lins hurl’d by stalwart hands:
So, prompted by his godlike courage, burn’d
Sarpedon to assail the lofty wall,
And storm the ramparts; and to Glaucus thus,
Son of Hippolochus, his speech address’d:

“Whence is it, Glaucus, that in Lycian land
We two at feasts the foremost seats may claim,
The largest portions, and the fullest cups?
Why held as Gods in honour? why endow’d
With ample heritage, by Xanthus’ banks,
Of vineyard, and of wheat producing land?
Then by the Lycians should we not be seen
The foremost to affront the raging fight?
So may our well-arm’d Lycians make their boast;
‘To no inglorious Kings we Lycians owe
Allegiance; they on richest viands feed;
Of luscious flavour drink the choicest wine;
But still their valour brightest shows; and they,
Where Lycians war, are foremost in the fight!’
O friend! if we, survivors of this war,
Could live, from age and death for ever free,
Thou shouldst not see me foremost in the fight,
Nor would I urge thee to the glorious field:
But since on man ten thousand forms of death
Attend, which none may ’scape, then on, that we
May glory on others gain, or they on us!”

Thus he; nor Glaucus from his bidding shrank;
And forward straight they led the Lycian pow’rs.
Menestheus, son of Peteus, with dismay
Observ’d their movement; for on his command,
Inspiring terror, their attack was made.
He look’d around him to the Grecian tow’rs,
If any chief might there be found, to save
His comrades from destruction; there he saw,
Of war insatiable, th’ Ajaces twain;
And Teucer, from the tent but newly come,
Hard by; nor yet could reach them with his voice;
Such was the din, such tumult rose to Heav’n,
From clatt’ring shields, and horsehair-crested helms,
And batter’d gates, now all at once assail’d:
Before them fiercely strove th’ assaulting bands
To break their way: he then Thootes sent,
His herald, to th’ Ajaces, craving aid.

“Haste thee, Thootes, on th’ Ajaces call,
Both, if it may be; so we best may hope
To ’scape the death, which else is near at hand;
So fierce the pressure of the Lycian chiefs,
Undaunted now, as ever, in the fight.
But if they too are hardly press’d, at least
Let Ajax, son of Telamon, be spar’d,
And with him Teucer, skilled to draw the bow.”
He said; the herald heard, and straight obey’d;
Along the wall, where stood the brass-clad Greeks,
He ran, and standing near th’ Ajaces, said:

“Ajaces, leaders of the brass-clad Greeks,
The son of Heav’n-born Peteus craves your aid.
To share awhile the labours of his guard;
Both, if it may be; so he best may hope
To ’scape the death, which else is near at hand:
So fierce the pressure of the Lycian chiefs,
Undaunted now, as ever, in the fight.
But if ye too are hardly press’d, at least
Let Ajax, son of Telamon, be spar’d,
And with him Teucer, skill’d to draw the bow.”

He said: the mighty son of Telamon
Consenting, thus addresss’d Oileus’ son:
“Ajax, do thou and valiant Lyeomede
Exhort the Greeks the struggle to maintain;
While I go yonder, to affront the war,
To aid their need, and back return in haste.”

Thus saying, Ajax Telamon set forth,
And with him Teucer went, his father’s son,
While by Pandion Teucer’s bow was borne.
At brave Menestheus’ tow’r, within the wall,
Arriv’d, sore press’d they found the garrison;
For like a whirlwind on the ramparts pour’d
The Lycians’ valiant councillors and chiefs.
They quickly join’d the fray, and loud arose
The battle-cry; first Ajax Telamon
Sarpedon’s comrade, brave Epicles, slew,
Struck by a rugged stone, within the wall
Which lay, the topmost of the parapet,
Of size prodigious; which with both his hands
A man in youth’s full vigour scarce could raise,
As men are now; he lifted it on high,
And downward hurl’d; the four-peak’d helm it broke,
Crushing the bone, and shatt’ring all the skull;
He, like a diver, from the lofty tow’r
Fell headlong down, and life forsook his bones,
Teucer, meanwhile, from off the lofty wall
The valiant Glaucus, pressing to the fight,
Struck with an arrow, where he saw his arm
Unguarded; he no longer brook’d the fray;
Back from the wall he sprang, in hopes to hide
From Grecian eyes his wound, that none might see,
And triumph o’er him with insulting words.
With grief Sarpedon saw his friend withdraw,
Yet not relax’d his efforts; Thestor’s son,
Alcmaon, with his spear he stabb’d, and back
The weapon drew; he, following, prostrate fell,
And loudly rang his arms of polish’d brass.
Then at the parapet, with stalwart hand,
Sarpedon tugg’d; and yielding to his force
Down fell the block entire; the wall laid bare,
To many at once the breach gave open way.
Ajax and Teucer him at once assail’d;
This with an arrow struck the glitt’ring belt
Around his breast, whence hung his pond’rous shield;
But Jove, who will’d not that his son should fall
Before the ships, the weapon turn’d aside.
Then forward Ajax sprang, and with his spear
Thrust at the shield; the weapon pass’d not through,
Yet check’d his bold advance; a little space
Back he recoil’d, but not the more withdrew,
His soul on glory intent; and rallying quick,
Thus to the warlike Lycians shouted loud:

“Why, Lycians, thus your wonted might relax?
’Tis hard for one alone, how brave soe’er,
E’en though he break the rampart down, to force
A passage to the ships; but on with me!
For work is here for many hands to do.”

He said; and by the King’s rebuke abash’d,
With fiercer zeal the Lycians press’d around
Their King and councillor; on th’ other side
Within the wall the Greeks their squadrons mass’d;
Then were great deeds achiev’d; nor thro’ the breach
Could the brave troops of Lycia to the ships
Their passage force; nor could the warrior Greeks
Repel the Lycians from the ground, where they,
Before the wall, had made their footing good.
As when two neighbours, in a common field,
Each line in hand, within a narrow space,
About the limits of their land contend;
Between them thus the rampart drew the line;
O’er which the full-orb’d shields of tough bull’s-hide,
And lighter bucklers on the warriors’ breasts
On either side they clove; and many a wound
The pitiless weapons dealt, on some who, turn’d,
Their neck and back laid bare; on many more,
Who full in front, and through their shields were struck.
On ev’ry side the parapet and tow’rs
With Greek and Trojan blood were spatter’d o’er.
Nor yet, e’en so, the Greeks to flight were driv’n;
But as a woman that for wages spins,
Honest and true, with wool and weights in hand,
In even balance holds the scales, to mete
Her humble hire, her children’s maintenance;
So even hung the balance of the war,
Till Jove with highest honour Hector crown’d,
The son of Priam; he, the foremost, scal’d
The wall, and loudly on the Trojans call’d:

“On, valiant Trojans, on! the Grecian wall
Break down, and wrap their ships in blazing fires.”

Thus he, exhorting, spoke; they heard him all,
And to the wall rush’d numberless, and swarm’d
Upon the ramparts, bristling thick with spears.
Then Hector, stooping, seiz’d a pond’rous stone
That lay before the gates; ’twas broad below,
But sharp above; and scarce two lab’ring men,
The strongest, from the ground could raise it up,
And load upon a wain; as men are now;
But he unaided lifted it with ease,
So light it seem’d, by grace of Saturn’s son.
As in one hand a shepherd bears with ease
A full-siz’d fleece, and scarcely feels the weight;
So Hector tow’rd the portals bore the stone,
Which clos’d the lofty double-folding gates,
Within defended by two massive bars
Laid crosswise, and with one cross bolt secur’d.
Close to the gate he stood; and planting firm
His foot, to give his arm its utmost pow’r,
Full on the middle dash’d the mighty mass.
The hinges both gave way; the pond’rous stone
Fell inwards; widely gap’d the op’ning gates;
Nor might the bars within the blow sustain:
This way and that the sever’d portals flew
Before the crashing missile; dark as night
His low’ring brow, great Hector sprang within;
Bright flash’d the brazen armour on his breast,
As through the gates, two jav’lins in his hand,
He sprang; the Gods except, no pow’r might meet
That onset; blaz’d his eyes with lurid fire.
Then to the Trojans, turning to the throng,
He call’d aloud to scale the lofty wall;
They heard, and straight obey’d; some scal’d the wall:
Some through the strong-built gates continuous pour’d;
While in confusion irretrievable
Fled to their ships the panic-stricken Greeks.




When Jove had Hector and the Trojans brought
Close to the ships, he left them there to toil
And strife continuous; turning his keen glance
To view far off th’ equestrian tribes of Thrace,
The warlike Mysians, and the men who feed
On milk of mares, thence Hippemolgi term’d;
A peaceful race, the justest of mankind.
On Troy he turn’d not once his piercing glance;
Nor deem’d he any God would dare to give
To Trojans or to Greeks his active aid.

No careless watch the monarch Neptune kept:
Wond’ring, he view’d the battle, where he sat
Aloft on wooded Samos’ topmost peak,
Samos of Thrace; whence Ida’s heights he saw,
And Priam’s city, and the ships of Greece.

Thither ascended from the sea, he sat;
And thence the Greeks, by Trojans overborne,
Pitying he saw, and deeply wroth with Jove.
Then down the mountain’s craggy side he pass’d
With rapid step; and as he mov’d along,
Beneath th’ immortal feet of Ocean’s Lord
Quak’d the huge mountain and the shadowy wood.
Three strides he took; the fourth, he reach’d his goal,
Ægae; where on the margin of the bay
His temple stood, all glitt’ring, all of gold,
Imperishable; there arriv’d, he yok’d
Beneath his car the brazen-footed steeds,
Of swiftest flight, with manes of flowing gold.
All clad in gold, the golden lash he grasp’d
Of curious work, and mounting on his car,
Skimm’d o’er the waves; from all the depths below
Gamboll’d around the monsters of the deep,
Acknowledging their King; the joyous sea
Parted her waves; swift flew the bounding steeds,
Nor was the brazen axle wet with spray,
When to the ships of Greece their Lord they bore.

Down in the deep recesses of the sea
A spacious cave there is, which lies midway
’Twixt Tenedos and Imbros’ rocky isle:
Th’ Earth-shaking Neptune there his coursers stay’d,
Loos’d from the chariot, and before them plac’d
Ambrosial provender; and round their feet
Shackles of gold, which none might break nor loose,
That there they might await their Lord’s return;
Then to the Grecian army took his way.

Meantime, by Hector, son of Priam, led,
Like fire, or whirlwind, press’d the Trojans on,
With furious zeal, and shouts and clamour hoarse;
In hopes to take the ships, and all the chiefs
To slay beside them; but from Ocean’s depths
Uprose th’ Earth-shaker, Circler of the Earth,
To Calchas’ likeness and deep voice conform’d,
And rous’d the fainting Greeks; th’ Ajaces first,
Themselves with ardour fill’d, he thus address’d:
“’Tis yours, Ajaces, fill’d with courage high,
Discarding chilly fear, to save the Greeks:
Elsewhere I dread not much the Trojan force,
Though they in crowds have scal’d the lofty wall;
The well-greav’d Greeks their onset may defy.
Yet greatly fear I lest we suffer loss,
Where that fierce, fiery madman, Hector, leads.
Who boasts himself the son of Jove most high.
But may some God your hearts inspire, yourselves
Firmly to stand, and cheer your comrades on;
So from your swiftly-sailing ships ye yet
May drive the foe, how bold soe’er he be,
Though by Olympian Jove himself upheld.”

So spake th’ Earth-shaker, Circler of the Earth,
And with his sceptre touching both the chiefs,
Fill’d them with strength and courage, and their limbs,
Their feet and hands, with active vigour strung;
Then like a swift-wing’d falcon sprang to flight,
Which down the sheer face of some lofty rock
Swoops on the plain to seize his feather’d prey:
So swiftly Neptune left the chiefs; him first
Departing, knew Oileus’ active son,
And thus the son of Telamon address’d:
“Ajax, since some one of th’ Olympian Gods,
In likeness of a seer, hath hither come
To urge us to the war (no Calchas he,
Our augur Heav’n-inspir’d; for well I mark’d
His movements, as he went; and of a God
’Tis easy to discern the outward signs),
I feel fresh spirit kindled in my breast,
And new-born vigour in my feet and hands.”

Whom answer’d thus the son of Telamon:
“My hands too grasp with firmer hold the spear,
My spirit like thine is stirr’d; I feel my feet
Instinct with fiery life; nor should I fear
With Hector, son of Priam, in his might
Alone to meet, and grapple to the death.”

Such was their mutual converse, as they joy’d
In the fierce transport by the God inspir’d.
Neptune, meanwhile, the other Greeks arous’d,
Who, to the ships withdrawn, their wasted strength
Recruited; for their limbs were faint with toil,
And grief was in their hearts, as they beheld
The Trojan hosts that scal’d the lofty wall;
They saw, and from their eyes the teardrops fell,
Of safety desp’rate; but th’ Earth-shaking God
Amid their ranks appearing, soon restor’d
Their firm array; to Teucer first he came,
To Leitus, and valiant Peneleus,
Thoas, Deipyrus, Meriones,
And young Antilochus, brave warriors all,
And to the chiefs his winged words address’d:

“Shame on ye, Grecian youths! to you I look’d
As to our ships’ defenders; but if ye
Shrink from the perilous battle, then indeed
Our day is come, to be by Troy subdu’d.
O Heav’n! a sad and wondrous sight is this,
A sight I never deem’d my eyes should see,
Our ships assail’d by Trojan troops; by those
Who heretofore have been as tim’rous hinds
Amid the forest depths, the helpless prey
Of jackals, pards, and wolves; they here and there,
Uncertain, heartless, unresisting, fly:
Such were the Trojans once; nor dar’d abide,
No, not an hour, the strength and arms of Greece;
And these are they, who now beside our ships,
Far from their city walls, maintain the fight,
Embolden’d by our great commander’s fault,
And slackness of the people, who, with him
Offended, scarce are brought to guard our ships.
And, feebly fighting, are beside them slain.
E’en though the mighty monarch, Atreus’ son,
Wide-ruling Agamemnon, be in truth
Wholly to blame in this, that he hath wrong’d
The son of Peleus, yet ’tis not for us
Our courage to relax. Arouse ye then!
A brave man’s spirit its vigour soon regains.
That ye, the best and bravest of the host,
Should stand aloof thus idly, ’tis not well;
If meaner men should from the battle shrink,
I might not blame them; but that such as ye
Should falter, indignation fills my soul.
Dear friends, from this remissness must accrue
Yet greater evils; but with gen’rous shame
And keen remorse let each man’s breast be fill’d;
Fierce is the struggle; in his pride of strength
Hector has forc’d the gates and massive bars,
And raging, ’mid the ships maintains the war.”

Thus Neptune on the Greeks, reproving, call’d:
Then round th’ Ajaces twain were cluster’d thick
The serried files, whose firm array nor Mars,
Nor spirit-stirring Pallas might reprove:
For there, the bravest all, in order due,
Waited the Trojan charge by Hector led:
Spear close by spear, and shield by shield o’erlaid,
Buckler to buckler press’d, and helm to helm,
And man to man; the horsehair plumes above,
That nodded on the warriors’ glitt’ring crests,
Each other touch’d; so closely massed they stood.
Backward, by many a stalwart hand, were drawn
The spears, in act to hurl; their eyes and minds
Turn’d to the front, and eager for the fray.
On pour’d the Trojan masses; in the van
Hector straight forward urg’d his furious course.
As some huge boulder, from its rocky bed
Detach’d, and by the wintry torrent’s force
Hurl’d down the cliff’s steep face, when constant rains
The massive rock’s firm hold have undermin’d;
With giant bounds it flies; the crashing wood
Resounds beneath it; still it hurries on,
Until, arriving at the level plain,
Its headlong impulse check’d, it rolls no more;
So Hector, threat’ning now through ships and tents,
E’en to the sea, to force his murd’rous way,
Anon, confronted by that phalanx firm,
Halts close before it; while the sons of Greece,
With thrust of sword and double-pointed spears,
Stave off his onset; he a little space
Withdrew, and loudly on the Trojans call’d:

“Trojans, and Lycians, and ye Dardans fam’d
In close encounter, stand ye firm! not long
The Greeks, though densely mass’d, shall bar my way,
But soon, methinks, before my spear shall quail,
If from the chief of Gods my mission be,
From Jove the Thund’rer, royal Juno’s Lord.”

His words fresh courage rais’d in ev’ry breast;
On loftiest deeds intent, Deiphobus,
The son of Priam, from the foremost ranks,
His shield’s broad orb before him borne, advanc’d
With airy step, protected by the shield:
At him Meriones with glitt’ring spear
Took aim, nor miss’d his mark; the shield’s broad orb
Of tough bull’s-hide it struck; but pass’d not through,
For near the head the sturdy shaft was snapp’d.
Yet from before his breast Deiphobus
Held at arm’s length his shield; for much he fear’d
The weapon of Meriones; but he
Back to his comrades’ shelt’ring ranks withdrew,
Griev’d at his baffled hopes and broken spear.
Then tow’rd the ships he bent his steps, to seek
Another spear, which in his tent remain’d.
The rest, ’mid wild uproar, maintain’d the fight.

There Teucer first, the son of Telamon,
A warrior slew, the son of Mentor, Lord
Of num’rous horses, Imbrius, spearman skill’d.
In former days, ere came the sons of Greece,
He in Pedaeus dwelt, and had to wife
Medesicaste, Priam’s bastard child;
But when the well-trimm’d ships of Greece appear’d,
Return’d to Troy; and there, rever’d by all,
With Priam dwelt, who lov’d him as a son.
Him Teucer with his lance below the ear
Stabb’d, and drew back the weapon; down he fell,
As by the woodman’s axe, on some high peak,
Falls a proud ash, conspicuous from afar,
Scatt’ring its tender foliage on the ground;
He fell; and loud his burnish’d armour rang.
Forth Teucer sprang to seize the spoil; at whom,
Advancing, Hector aim’d his glitt’ring spear;
He saw, and, stooping, shunn’d the brazen death
A little space; but through the breast it struck
Amphimachus, the son of Cteatus,
The son of Actor, hastening to the fight:
Thund’ring he fell, and loud his armour rang.
Then forward Hector sprang, in hopes to seize
The brazen helm, that fitted well the brow
Of brave Amphimachus; but Ajax met
Th’ advance of Hector with his glitt’ring spear;
Himself he reach’d not, all in dazzling brass
Encas’d; but pressing on his bossy shield
Drove by main force beyond where lay the dead:
Them both the Greeks withdrew; th’ Athenian chiefs
Stychius and brave Menestheus, bore away
Amid the ranks of Greece Amphimachus;
While, as two lions high above the ground
Bear through the brushwood in their jaws a goat,
Snatch’d from the sharp-fang’d dogs’ protecting care:
So, fill’d with warlike rage, th’ Ajaces twain
Lifted on high, and of its armour stripp’d
The corpse of Imbrius; and Oileus’ son,
Griev’d at Amphimachus, his comrade’s death,
Cut from the tender neck, and like a ball
Sent whirling through the crowd the sever’d head;
And in the dust at Hector’s feet it fell.
Then, for his grandson slain, fierce anger fill’d
The breast of Neptune; through the tents of Greece
And ships he pass’d, the Greeks encouraging,
And ills preparing for the sons of Troy.
Him met Idomeneus, the warrior King,
Leaving a comrade, from the battle field,
Wounded behind the knee, but newly brought;
Borne by his comrades, to the leech’s care
He left him, eager to rejoin the fray;
Whom by his tent th’ Earth-shaking God address’d,
The voice assuming of Andraemon’s son,
Who o’er th’ Ætolians, as a God rever’d,
In Pleuron reign’d, and lofty Calydon:

“Where now, Idomeneus, sage Cretan chief,
Are all the vaunting threats, so freely pour’d
Against the Trojans by the sons of Greece?”

To whom the Cretan King, Idomeneus:
“Thoas, on none, so far as I may judge,
May blame be cast; we all our duties know;
Nor see I one by heartless fear restrain’d,
Nor hanging back, and flinching from the war:
Yet by th’ o’erruling will of Saturn’s son
It seems decreed that here the Greeks should fall,
And far from Argos lie in nameless graves.
But, Thoas, as thyself art ever staunch,
Nor slow the laggards to reprove, thy work
Remit not now; but rouse each sev’ral man.”

To whom Earth-shaking Neptune thus replied:
“Idomeneus, may he from Troy return
No more, but here remain to glut the dogs,
If such there be, from this day’s fight who shrinks.
But haste thee, don thine arms; great need is now
To hasten, if in aught we two may serve:
E’en meaner men, united, courage gain;
But we the bravest need not fear to meet.”

He said, and to the strife of men return’d.
Within his well-constructed tent arriv’d,
Straight donn’d Idomeneus his armour bright:
Two spears he took; and, like the lightning’s flash,
Which, as a sign to men, the hand of Jove
Hurls downwards from Olympus’ glitt’ring heights;
Whose dazzling radiance far around is thrown;
Flash’d, as the warrior ran, his armour bright.
Him met Meriones, his follower brave,
Close to the tent; to seek a spear he came;
To whom Idomeneus: “Meriones,
Swift-footed son of Molus, comrade dear,
Why com’st thou here, and leav’st the battle field?
Hast thou some wound receiv’d, whereof the pain
Subdues thy spirit? or com’st thou, to the field
To summon me? unsummon’d, well thou know’st
I better love the battle than the tent.”

Whom answer’d thus the sage Meriones:
“Idomeneus, the brass-clad Cretans’ King,
I come to seek a spear, if haply such
Within thy tent be found; for, in the fight,
That which I lately bore, e’en now I broke
Against the shield of brave Deiphobus.”

To whom Idomeneus, the Cretan King:
“Of spears, or one, or twenty, if thou list,
Thou there mayst find against the polish’d wall.
The spoil of Trojans slain; for with my foes
’Tis not my wont to wage a distant war.
Thence have I store of spears, and bossy shields,
And crested helms, and breastplates polish’d bright.”

Whom answer’d thus the sage Meriones:
“Nor are my tent and dark-ribb’d ship devoid
Of Trojan spoils; but they are far to seek;
Nor deem I that my hand is slack in fight;
For ’mid the foremost in the glorious strife
I stand, whene’er is heard the battle cry.
My deeds by others of the brass-clad Greeks
May not be noted; but thou know’st them well.”

To whom Idomeneus, the Cretan King:
“What need of this? thy prowess well I know;
For should we choose our bravest through the fleet
To man the secret ambush, surest test
Of warriors’ courage, where is manifest
The diff’rence ’twixt the coward and the brave;
(The coward’s colour changes, nor his soul
Within his breast its even balance keeps,
But changing still, from foot to foot he shifts,
And in his bosom loudly beats his heart,
Expecting death; and chatter all his teeth:
The brave man’s colour changes not; no fear
He knows, the ambush ent’ring; all his pray’r
Is that the hour of battle soon may come)
E’en there, thy courage none might call in doubt.
Shouldst thou from spear or sword receive a wound,
Not on thy neck behind, nor on thy back
Would fall the blow, but on thy breast, in front,
Still pressing onward ’mid the foremost ranks.
But come, prolong we not this idle talk,
Like babblers vain, who scorn might justly move:
Haste to my tent, and there select thy spear.”

He said: and from the tent Meriones,
Valiant as Mars, his spear selected straight,
And, eager for the fray, rejoin’d his chief.
As Mars, the bane of men, goes forth to war,
Attended by his strong, unfearing son,
Terror, who shakes the bravest warrior’s soul;
They two, from Thrace, against the Ephyri,
Or haughty Phlegyans arm; nor hear alike
The pray’rs of both the combatants, one side
With vict’ry crowning; so to battle went
Those leaders twain, in dazzling arms array’d:
Then thus Meriones his chief address’d:

“Son of Deucalion, say if on the right,
Or on the centre of the gen’ral host,
Our onset should be made, or on the left;
For there, methinks, most succour need the Greeks.”

To whom Idomeneus, the Cretan chief:
“Others there are the centre to defend,
Th’ Ajaces both, and Teucer, of the Greeks
Best archer, good too in the standing fight;
These may for Hector full employment find,
Brave as he is, and eager for the fray;
E’en for his courage ’twere a task too hard,
Their might to conquer, and resistless hands,
And burn the ships, if Saturn’s son himself
Fire not, and ’mid the shipping throw the torch.
Great Ajax Telamon to none would yield,
Of mortal birth, by earthly food sustain’d,
By spear or pond’rous stone assailable;
In hand to hand encounter, scarce surpass’d
By Peleus’ son Achilles; though with him
In speed of foot he might not hope to vie.
Then on the left let us our onset make;
And quickly learn if we on others’ heads
Are doom’d to win renown, or they on ours.”

He said: and, brave as Mars, Meriones,
Thither where he directed, led the way.
Now when, attended thus, Idomeneus,
Like blazing fire, in dazzling arms appear’d,
Around him throng’d, with rallying cries, the Greeks,
And rag’d beside the ships the balanc’d fight.
As, when the dust lies deepest on the roads,
Before the boist’rous winds the storm drives fast,
And high at once the whirling clouds are toss’d;
So was the fight confus’d; and in the throng
Each man with keen desire of slaughter burn’d.
Bristled the deadly strife with pond’rous spears,
Wielded with dire intent; the brazen gleam
Dazzled the sight, by flashing helmets cast,
And breastplates polish’d bright, and glitt’ring shields
Commingling; stern of heart indeed were he,
Who on that sight with joy, not pain, could gaze.

Dire evil then on mortal warriors brought
The diverse minds of Saturn’s mighty sons:
To Hector and the Trojans Jove design’d,
In honour of Achilles, swift of foot,
To give the vict’ry; yet not utterly
He will’d to slay before the walls of Troy
The Grecian host; but glory to confer
On Thetis and her noble-minded son.
Neptune, on th’ other side, the Greeks inspir’d,
Clandestine rising from the hoary sea;
For them before the Trojan host o’erborne
He saw with grief, and deeply wroth with Jove.
Equal the rank of both, their birth the same,
But Jove in wisdom, as in years, the first.
Nor ventur’d Neptune openly to aid
The cause of Greece; but cloth’d in mortal form,
In secret still the army’s courage rous’d.
This way and that they tugg’d of furious war
And balanc’d strife, where many a warrior fell,
The straining rope, which none might break or loose.
Then, though his hair was grizzl’d o’er with age,
Calling the Greeks to aid, Idomeneus,
Inspiring terror, on the Trojans sprang,
And slew Othryoneus, who but of late
Came from Cabesus on the alarm of war;
And, welcomed as a guest in Priam’s house,
The fairest of his daughters sought to wed,
No portion asked, Cassandra; mighty deeds
He promis’d, from before the walls of Troy
In their despite to drive the sons of Greece.
The aged Priam listen’d to his snit;
And he, his promise trusting, fought for Troy.
Him, marching with proud step, Idomeneus
Struck with his glitt’ring spear, nor aught avail’d
His brazen breastplate; through the middle thrust,
Thund’ring he fell: the victor vaunting cried:

“Othryoneus, above all mortal men
I hold thee in respect, if thou indeed
Wilt make thy words to aged Priam good,
Who promis’d thee his daughter in return:
We too would offer thee a like reward;
And give thee here to wed, from Argos brought,
Atrides’ fairest daughter, if with us
Thou wilt o’erthrow the well-built walls of Troy.
Come then, on board our ocean-going ships
Discuss the marriage contract; nor shall we
Be found illib’ral of our bridal gifts.”

He said, and seizing by the foot the slain,
Dragg’d from the press; but to the rescue came
Asius, himself on foot before his car:
So close his charioteer the horses held,
They breath’d upon his shoulders; eagerly
He sought to reach Idomeneus; but he,
Preventing, through his gullet drove the spear,
Beneath his chin; right through the weapon pass’d;
He fell; as falls an oak, or poplar tall,
Or lofty pine, which on the mountain top,
For some proud ship, the woodman’s axe hath hewn:
So he, before the car and horses stretch’d,
His death-cry utt’ring, clutch’d the blood-stain’d soil;
Bewilder’d, helpless, stood his charioteer;
Nor dar’d, escaping from the foemen’s hands,
To turn his horses: him, Antilochus
Beneath the waistband struck; nor aught avail’d
His brazen breastplate; through the middle thrust,
He, from the well-wrought chariot, gasping, fell.
Antilochus, the noble Nestor’s son,
The horses seiz’d, and from the Trojan ranks
Drove to the Grecian camp. For Asius’ death
Deep griev’d, Deiphobus, approaching, hurl’d
Against Idomeneus his glitt’ring spear:
The coming weapon he beheld, and shunn’d:
Beneath the ample circle of his shield,
With hides and brazen plates encircled round,
And by two rods sustain’d, conceal’d he stood:
Beneath he crouch’d, and o’er him flew the spear:
Yet harsh it grated, glancing from the shield;
Nor bootless from that stalwart hand it flew,
But through the midriff, close below the heart,
Hypsenor, son of Hippasus, it struck,
And straight relax’d his limbs; then shouting loud,
In boastful tone, Deiphobus exclaim’d:

“Not unaveng’d lies Asius; he, methinks,
As I have found him fellowship, with joy
Thro’ Hades’ strongly-guarded gates may pass.”
He said; the Greeks, indignant, heard his boast;
Chief, of Antilochus the manly soul
Was stirr’d within him; yet amid his grief
His comrade not forgetting, up he ran,
And o’er him spread the cover of his shield.
Meanwhile, two trusty friends, Mecistheus, son
Of Echius, and Alastor, rais’d the slain,
And deeply groaning bore him to the ships.
Nor did Idomeneus his noble rage
Abate; still burning o’er some Trojan soul
To draw the gloomy veil of night and death;
Or, having sav’d the Greeks, himself to fall.
Then high-born Æsuetes’ son he slew,
Alcathous; he, Anchises’ son-in-law,
The eldest of his daughters had to wife,
Hippodamia; by her parents both,
O’er all, belov’d; in beauty, skill, and mind,
All her compeers surpassing; wife of one,
The noblest man through all the breadth of Troy.
Him Neptune by Idomeneus subdued;
Seal’d his quick eyes, his active limbs restrain’d,
Without the pow’r to fly, or shun the spear;
Fix’d as a pillar, or a lofty tree,
He stood, while through his breast Idomeneus
His weapon drove; the brazen mail it broke,
Which oft had turn’d aside the stroke of death;
Harshly it grated, sever’d by the spear:
He fell; the spear-point quiv’ring in his heart,
Which with convulsive throbbings shook the shaft.
There Mars its course arrested. Then with shouts
Of triumph, vaunting, thus Idomeneus:

“How now, Deiphobus? are three for one
An equal balance? where are now thy boasts?
Come forth, my friend, thyself to me oppos’d;
And learn, if here, unworthy my descent
From Jove, my great progenitor, I stand.
He Minos, guardian chief of Crete, begot;
Noble Deucalion was to Minos born,
I to Deucalion; far extends my rule
In wide-spread Crete; whom now our ships have brought,
A bane to thee, thy sire, and Trojans all.”

He said; and doubtful stood Deiphobus,
Or to retreat, and summon to his aid
The Trojans, or alone the venture try.
Thus as he mus’d, the wiser course appear’d
To seek Æneas; him he found apart,
Behind the crowd; for he was still at feud
With godlike Priam, who, he thought, withheld
The public honour to his valour due.
To whom Deiphobus, approaching, thus:

“Æneas, sagest councillor of Troy,
Behoves thee now, if rev’rence for the dead
Can move thy soul, thy sister’s husband aid:
Haste we to save Alcathous; who of old,
When thou wast little, in thy father’s house,
Nurs’d thee with tender care; for him, but now,
The spear-renown’d Idomeneus hath slain.”

He said; Æneas’ spirit was rous’d, and fill’d
With martial rage he sought Idomeneus.
Nor, cowardlike, did he th’ encounter shun;
But firmly stood, as stands a mountain-boar
Self-confident, that in some lonely spot
Awaits the clam’rous chase; bristles his back;
His eyes with fire are flashing; and his tusks
He whets, on men and dogs prepar’d to rush:
So stood the spear-renown’d Idomeneus,
The onset of Æneas, swift in fight,
Awaiting; and the friends he saw around
He summon’d to his aid; Ascalaphus,
Deipyrus, and brave Meriones,
Antilochus and Aphareus; to these,
Tried warriors all, he thus addressed his speech:

“Aid me, my friends! alone I stand, and dread
The onset of Æneas, swift of foot.
Mighty to slay in battle; and the bloom
Of youth is his, the crown of human strength;
If, as our spirit, our years were but the same,
Great glory now should he, or I, obtain.”
He said; and, one in heart, their bucklers slop’d
Upon their shoulders, all beside him stood.

On th’ other side, Æneas to his aid
Summon’d his brother chiefs, Deiphobus,
And Paris, and Agenor; following whom
Came on the gen’ral crowd; as flocks of sheep
From pasture follow to their drinking-place
The lordly ram; well pleas’d the shepherd sees;
So pleas’d, Æneas saw the gath’ring crowd.
Then o’er Alcathous hand to hand was wag’d
The war of spears; dire was the clash of brass
Upon the heroes’ breasts, as ’mid the press
Each aim’d at other; proudly eminent
Stood forth two mighty warriors, terrible
As Mars, Æneas and Idomeneus,
Their sharp spears wielding each at other’s life.
First at Idomeneus Æneas threw
His spear; he saw, and shunn’d the brazen point;
And vainly from his stalwart hand dismiss’d,
Æneas’ spear stood quiv’ring in the ground.
Idomeneus in front, below the waist,
Œnomaus struck; the weighty spear broke through
The hollow breastplate, and th’ intestines tore;
Prone in the dust he fell, and clutch’d the ground.
Forthwith Idomeneus from out the corpse
The pond’rous spear withdrew; yet could not strip
His armour off; so thickly flew the spears.
Nor did his feet retain their youthful force,
His weapon to regain, or back to spring.
Skill’d in the standing fight his life to guard,
He lack’d the active pow’r of swift retreat.
At him, retiring slow, Deiphobus,
Still fill’d with anger, threw his glitt’ring spear:
His aim he miss’d; but through the shoulder pierc’d
Ascalaphus, a valiant son of Mars;
Prone in the dust he fell, and clutch’d the ground.
Nor knew the loud-voic’d, mighty God of War
That in the stubborn fight his son had fall’n;
On high Olympus, girt with golden clouds,
He sat, amid th’ Immortals all, restrain’d,
By Jove’s commands, from mingling in the war.
How hand to hand around Ascalaphus
Rag’d the fierce conflict: first Deiphobus
From off his head the glitt’ring helmet tore;
But, terrible as Mars, Meriones
Sprang forth, and pierc’d his arm; and from his hand
With hollow sound the crested helmet fell.
On, like a vulture, sprang Meriones,
And from his arm the sturdy spear withdrew;
Then backward leap’d amid his comrades’ ranks;
While round his brother’s waist Polites threw
His arms, and led him from the battle-field
To where, with charioteer and rich-wrought car,
Beyond the fight, his flying coursers stood.
Him, rack’d with pain, and groaning, while the blood
Stream’d down his wounded arm, to Troy they bore.
The rest fought on, and loud the tumult rose.

Æneas through the throat of Aphareus,
Caletor’s son, turn’d sideways tow’rds him, drove
His glitt’ring spear; and down on th’ other side,
His shield and helmet following, sank his head;
And o’er his eyes were cast the shades of death.
As Thoon turn’d, Antilochus, who watch’d
Th’ occasion, forward sprang, and with his spear
Ripp’d all the flesh that lay along the spine
Up to the neck; he backward fell, with hands
Uplifted calling for his comrades’ aid:
But forward sprang Antilochus, and tore
His armour from his breast, while round he cast
His watchful glances; for on ev’ry side
On his broad shield the Trojans show’r’d their blows,
But touch’d him not; for Neptune, ’mid the throng
Of weapons, threw his guard o’er Nestor’s son.
Yet not aloof he stood, but in their midst,
Commingled; nor held motionless his spear;
But ever threat’ning, turn’d from side to side,
Prepar’d to hurl, or hand to hand engage.
Him Adamas, the son of Asius, marked,
As o’er the crowd he glanc’d; and springing forth,
Struck with his spear the centre of the shield;
But dark-hair’d Neptune grudg’d the hero’s life,
And stay’d the brazen point; half in the shield,
Like a fire-harden’d stake, remained infix’d,
The other half lay broken, on the ground.
Back to his comrades’ shelt’ring ranks he sprang,
In hope of safety; but Meriones,
Quick-following, plung’d his weapon through his groin,
Where sharpest agony to wretched men
Attends on death; there planted he his spear:
Around the shaft he writh’d, and gasping groan’d,
Like to a mountain bull, which, bound with cords,
The herdsmen drag along, with struggles vain,
Resisting; so the wounded warrior groan’d:
But not for long: for fierce Meriones,
Approaching, from his body tore the spear,
And the dark shades of death his eyes o’erspread.
Then Helenus, a weighty Thracian sword
Wielding aloft, across the temples smote
Deipyrus, and all his helmet crash’d;
Which, as it roll’d beneath their feet, some Greek
Seiz’d ’mid the press; his eyes were clos’d in death.
The valiant Menelaus, Atreus’ son,
With grief beheld; and royal Helenus
With threat’ning mien approaching, pois’d on high
His glitt’ring spear, while he the bowstring drew.
Then simultaneous flew from either side
The gleaming spear, and arrow from the string.
The shaft of Priam’s son below the breast
The hollow cuirass struck, and bounded off;
As bound the dark-skinn’d beans, or clatt’ring peas,
From the broad fan upon the threshing-floor,
By the brisk breeze impell’d, and winnower’s force;
From noble Menelaus’ cuirass so
The stinging arrow bounding, glanc’d afar.
But valiant Menelaus, Atreus’ son,
Transfix’d the hand that held the polish’d bow:
The brazen point pass’d through, and to the bow
The hand was pinn’d; back to his comrades’ ranks
He sprang, in hope of safety, hanging down
The wounded limb, that trail’d the ashen spear.
Agenor from the wound the spear withdrew,
And with a twisted sling of woollen cloth,
By an attendant brought, bound up the hand.
To noble Menelaus stood oppos’d
Peisander, to the confines dark of death
Led by his evil fate, by thee to fall,
Great son of Atreus, in the deadly strife.
When near they drew, Atrides miss’d his aim,
With erring spear divergent; next his shield
Peisander struck, but drove not through the spear;
For the broad shield resisted, and the shaft
Was snapp’d in sunder: Menelaus saw
Rejoicing, and with hope of triumph flush’d;
Unsheathing then his silver-studded sword
Rush’d on Peisander; he beneath his shield
Drew forth a pond’rous brazen battle-axe,
With handle long, of polish’d olive-wood:
And both at once in deadly combat join’d.
Then, just below the plume, Peisander struck
The crested helmet’s peak; but Atreus’ son
Met him advancing, and across the brow
Smote him, above the nose; loud crash’d the bone,
And in the dust the gory eyeballs dropp’d
Before him; doubled with the pain, he fell:
The victor, planting on his chest his foot,
Stripp’d off his arms, and thus exulting cried:
“Thus shall ye all, insatiate of the fight,
Proud Trojans, from before our ships depart;
Nor lack your share of insult and of wrong,
Such as on me, vile hounds, ye cast erewhile,
Nor fear’d th’ avenger of the slighted laws
Of hospitality, high thund’ring Jove,
Who soon your lofty city shall o’erthrow.
Kindly receiv’d, my virgin-wedded wife,
With store of goods, ye basely bore away;
And now ye rage, infuriate, to destroy
With fire our ocean-going ships, and slay
Our Grecian heroes; but the time shall come
When ye too fain would from the war escape.
O Father Jove, ’tis said that thou excell’st,
In wisdom, Gods and men; all human things
From thee proceed; and can it be, that thou
With favour seest these men of violence,
These Trojans, with presumptuous courage fill’d,
Whose rage for the battle knows nor stint nor bound?
Men are with all things sated; sleep and love;
Sweet sounds of music, and the joyous dance.
Of these may some more gladly take their fill;
But Trojans still for war, instiate, thirst.”

Thus Menelaus; and the blood-stained arms
Stripp’d from the corpse, and to his comrades gave;
Then join’d again the foremost in the fray.
There to th’ encounter forth Harpalion sprang,
Son of the King Pylaemenes, who came,
His father following, to the war of Troy,
But back return’d not to his native land.
He standing near, full in the centre struck
Atrides’ shield, but drove not through the spear;
Back to his comrades’ shelt’ring ranks he sprang
In hopes of safety, glancing all around,
His body to defend; but as he turn’d,
In his right flank a brazen-pointed shaft,
Shot by Meriones, was buried deep:
Beneath the bone it pass’d, and pierc’d him through.
At once he fell; and gasping out his life,
Amid his comrades, writhing on the ground
Like a crush’d worm he lay; and from the wound
The dark blood pouring, drench’d the thirsty soil.

The valiant troops of Paphlagonia clos’d
Around him; on his car they plac’d the slain.
And deeply sorrowing, to the city bore;
His father, weeping, walk’d beside the car,[4]
Nor vengeance for his slaughter’d son obtain’d.
Paris with grief and anger saw him fall:
For he in former days his guest had been
In Paphlagonia; then, with anger fill’d,
A brass-tipp’d arrow from his bow he sent.

A certain man there was, Euchenor nam’d,
Who dwelt in Corinth; rich, of blameless life,
The son of Polyeidus, skilful seer:
His fate well knowing, he embark’d; for oft
The good old man had told him that his doom
Was, or at home by sharp disease to die,
Or with the Greeks by Trojan hands to fall.
Embarking, he escap’d alike the fine
By Greeks impos’d, and pangs of sharp disease.
Him Paris smote between the ear and jaw;
Swift fled his spirit, and darkness clos’d his eyes.
Thus rag’d, like blazing fire, the furious fight.

But nought as yet had Hector heard, nor knew
How sorely, leftward of the ships, were press’d
The Trojans by the Greeks; and now appear’d
Their triumph, sure; such succour Neptune gave,
Their courage rousing, and imparting strength.
But there he kept, where first the serried ranks
Of Greeks he broke, and storm’d the wall and gates;
There beach’d beside the hoary sea, the ships
Of Ajax and Protesilaus lay;
There had the wall been lowest built; and there
Were gather’d in defence the chiefest all,
Horses and men: the stout Bœotians there,
Join’d to th’ Ionians with their flowing robes,
Loerians, and Phthians, and Epeians proud,
Could scarce protect their ships; nor could repel
Th’ impetuous fire of godlike Hector’s charge.
There too the choicest troops of Athens fought;
Their chief, Menestheus, Peteus’ son; with whom
Were Pheidas, Stichius, Bias in command;
Th’ Epeians Meges, Phyleus’ son, obey’d,
And Dracius and Amphion; Medon next,
With brave Podarces led the Phthian host:
Medon, the great Oileus’ bastard son,
Brother of Ajax; he in Phylace,
Far from his native land, was driv’n to dwell,
Since one to Eriopis near akin,
His sire Oileus’ wife, his hand had slain.
Podarces from Iphiclus claim’d his birth,
The son of Phylacus; these two in arms
The valiant Phthians leading to the fight,
Join’d the Bœotian troops to guard the ships.
But from the side of Ajax Telamon
Stirr’d not a whit Oileus’ active son;
But as on fallow-land with one accord,
Two dark-red oxen drag the well-wrought plough,
Streaming with sweat that gathers round their horns;
They by the polish’d yoke together held,
The stiff soil cleaving, down the furrow strain;
So closely, side by side, those two advanc’d.
But comrades, many and brave, on Telamon
Attended, who, whene’er with toil and sweat
His limbs grew faint, upheld his weighty shield;
While in the fray, Oileus’ noble son
No Locrians follow’d; theirs were not the hearts
To brook th’ endurance of the standing fight;
Nor had they brass-bound helms, with horsehair plume,
Nor ample shields they bore, nor ashen spear;
But came to Troy, in bows and twisted slings
Of woollen cloth confiding; and from these
Their bolts quick-show’ring, broke the Trojan ranks.
While those, in front, in glitt’ring arms oppos’d
The men of Troy, by noble Hector led:
These, in the rear, unseen, their arrows shot.
Nor stood the Trojans; for amid their ranks
The galling arrows dire confusion spread.
Then had the Trojans from the ships and tents
Back to the breezy heights of Troy been driv’n
In flight disastrous; but Polydamas
Drew near to Hector, and address’d him thus:

“Hector, I know thee, how unapt thou art
To hearken to advice; because the Gods
Have giv’n thee to excel in warlike might,
Thou deemest thyself, in counsel too, supreme;
Yet every gift thou canst not so combine:
To one the Gods have granted warlike might,
To one the dance, to one the lyre and song;
While in another’s breast all-seeing Jove
Hath plac’d the spirit of wisdom, and a mind
Discerning, for the common good of all:
By him are states preserv’d; and he himself
Best knows the value of the precious gift.
Then hear what seems to me the wisest course.
On ev’ry side the circling ring of war
Is blazing all around thee; and, thou seest,
Our valiant Trojans, since the wall they scal’d,
Or stand aloof, or scatter’d ’mid the ships
Outnumber’d, with superior forces strive.
Then thou, retiring, hither call the chiefs;
Here take we counsel fully, if to fall
Upon their well-mann’d ships, should Heaven vouchsafe
The needful strength, or, scatheless yet, withdraw;
For much I fear they soon will pay us back
Their debt of yesterday; since in their ranks
One yet remains insatiate of the fight,
And he, methinks, not long will stand aloof.”

Thus he: the prudent counsel Hector pleas’d;
Down from his chariot with his arms he leap’d,
And to Polydamas his speech address’d:

“Polydamas, detain thou here the chiefs;
Thither will I, and meet the front of war,
And, giv’n my orders, quickly here return.”

He said; and, like a snow-clad mountain high,
Uprose; and loudly shouting, in hot haste
Flew through the Trojan and Confed’rate host.
At sound of Hector’s voice, round Panthous’ son,
Polydamas, were gather’d all the chiefs.
But ’mid the foremost combatants he sought
If haply he might find Deiphobus,
And royal Helenus, and Adamas,
And gallant Asius, son of Hyrtacus.
These found he not unscath’d by wounds or death;
For some beside the ships of Greece had paid,
By Grecian hands, the forfeit of their lives,
While others wounded lay within the wall.
But, to the leftward of the bloody fray,
The godlike Paris, fair-hair’d Helen’s Lord,
Cheering his comrades to the fight, he found,
And with reproachful words address’d him thus:

“Thou wretched Paris, fair in outward form,
Thou slave of woman, manhood’s counterfeit,
Where is Deiphobus, and where the might
Of royal Helenus? where Adamas,
The son of Asius? where too Asius, son
Of Hyrtacus? and where Othryoneus?
Now from its summit totters to the fall
Our lofty Ilium; now thy doom is sure.”

To whom the godlike Paris thus replied:
“Hector, since blameless I incur thy blame,
Ne’er have I less withdrawn me from the fight,
And me not wholly vile my mother bore;
For since thou gav’st command to attack the ships,
We here against the Greeks unflinching war
Have wag’d; our comrades, whom thou seek’st, are slain:
Only Deiphobus hath left the field,
And Helenus; both wounded by the spear,
Both through the hand; but Jove their life hath spar’d.
But thou, where’er thy courage bids, lead on:
We shall be prompt to follow; to our pow’r
Thou shalt in us no lack of valour find;
Beyond his pow’r the bravest cannot fight.”

Wrought on his brother’s mind the hero’s words:
Together both they bent their steps, where rag’d
The fiercest conflict; there Cebriones,
Phalces, Orthaeus, brave Polydamas,
Palmys, and godlike Polyphetes’ might,
And Morys, and Ascanius fought; these two
Hippotion’s sons; from rich Ascania’s plains
They, as reliefs, but yestermorn had come;
Impell’d by Jove, they sought the battle field.
Onward they dash’d, impetuous as the rush
Of the fierce whirlwind, which with lightning charg’d,
From Father Jove sweeps downward o’er the plain:
As with loud roar it mingles with the sea,
The many-dashing ocean’s billows boil,
Upheaving, foam-white-crested, wave on wave;
So, rank on rank, the Trojans, closely mass’d,
In arms all glitt’ring, with their chiefs advanc’d;
Hector, the son of Priam, led them on,
In combat terrible as blood-stain’d Mars:
Before his breast his shield’s broad orb he bore,
Of hides close join’d, with brazen plates o’erlaid;
The gleaming helmet nodded o’er his brow.
He, with proud step, protected by his shield,
On ev’ry side the hostile ranks survey’d,
If signs of yielding he might trace; but they
Unshaken stood; and with like haughty mien,
Ajax at Hector thus defiance hurl’d:

“Draw nearer, mighty chief; why seek to scare
Our valiant Greeks? we boast ourselves of war
Not wholly unskill’d, though now the hand of Jove
Lies heavy on us with the scourge of Heav’n.
Thou hop’st, forsooth, our vessels to destroy;
But stalwart arms for their defence we boast.
Long ere that day shall your proud city fall,
Tak’n and destroy’d by our victorious hands.
Not far the hour, when thou thyself in flight
To Jove and all the Gods shalt make thy pray’r,
That swifter than the falcon’s wing thy steeds
May bear thee o’er the dusty plain to Troy.”

Thus as he spoke, upon his right appear’d
An eagle, soaring high; the crowd of Greeks
The fav’ring omen saw, and shouted loud:
Then noble Hector thus: “What words are these,
Ajax, thou babbling braggart, vain of speech!
For would to Heav’n I were as well assur’d
I were the son of aegis-bearing Jove,
Born of imperial Juno, and myself
In equal honour with Apollo held
Or blue-ey’d Pallas, as I am assur’d
This day is fraught with ill to all the Greeks:
Thou ’mid the rest shalt perish, if thou dare
My spear encounter, which thy dainty skin
Shall rend; and slain beside the ships, thy flesh
Shall glut the dogs and carrion birds of Troy.”

He said, and led them on; with eager cheers
They followed; shouted loud the hindmost throng.
On th’ other side the Greeks return’d the shout:
Of all the Trojans’ bravest they, unmov’d,
The onset bore; their mingled clamours rose
To Heav’n, and reach’d the glorious light of Jove.





Nor did the battle-din not reach the ears
Of Nestor, o’er the wine-cup; and his speech
He thus address’d to Æsculapius’ son:

“Say, good Machaon, what these sounds may mean;
For louder swells the tumult round the ships.
But sit thou here, and drink the ruddy wine,
Till fair-hair’d Hecamede shall prepare
The gentle bath, and wash thy gory wounds;
While I go forth, and all around survey.”

He said, and from the wall a buckler took,
Well-wrought, with brass resplendent, which his son,
Brave Thrasymedes, in the tent had left,
While with his father’s shield himself was girt;
A sturdy spear too, tipp’d with brass, he took:
Without the tent he stood; and there his eyes
A woful sight beheld; the Greeks in flight,
The haughty Trojans pressing on their rout
Confus’d; the Greeks’ protecting wall o’erthrown.
As heaves the darkling sea with silent swell,
Expectant of the boist’rous gale’s approach;
Nor onward either way is pour’d its flood,
Until it feel th’ impelling blast from Heav’n;
So stood th’ old man, his mind perplex’d with doubt,
To mingle in the throng, or counsel seek
Of mighty Agamemnon, Atreus’ son.
Thus as he mused, the better course appear’d,
To seek Atrides; fiercely fought the rest
With mutual slaughter; loud their armour rang
With thrusts of swords and double-pointed spears.
There Nestor met, advancing from the ships,
The Heav’n-born Kings, Ulysses, Diomed,
And Agamemnon, son of Atreus, all
By wounds disabled; for the ships were beach’d
Upon the shore, beside the hoary sea,
Far from the battle; higher, tow’rd the plain
The foremost had been drawn, and with a wall
Their sterns surrounded; for the spacious beach
Could not contain them, and in narrow bounds
Were pent their multitudes; so high on land
They drew, and rang’d them side by side, and fill’d,
Within the headlands, all the wide-mouth’d bay.
Thus they, their steps supporting on their spears,
Together came, spectators of the fight;
Deep sorrow fill’d their breasts; them Nestor met,
The fear increasing, which their souls possess’d.
To whom the monarch Agamemnon thus:

“O Nestor, son of Neleus, pride of Greece,
Why com’st thou here, and leav’st the battle-field?
Greatly I fear that noble Hector now
His menace will fulfil, who made his boast
Before th’ assembled Trojans, that to Troy
He never would return, until our ships
The flames had master’d, and ourselves the sword.
Such was his threat, and now he makes it good.
Heav’n! can it be that I of other Greeks,
As of Achilles, have incurr’d the wrath,
Who thence refuse to battle for the ships?”

To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied:
“Such are indeed our prospects; Jove on high
Could to our fortunes give no diff’rent turn.
The wall is raz’d, wherein our trust we plac’d
To guard, impregnable, ourselves and ships;
And now around the ships their war they wage,
Unceasing, unabated; none might tell
By closest scrutiny, which way are driv’n
The routed Greeks, so intermix’d they fall
Promiscuous; and the cry ascends to Heav’n.
But come, discuss we what may best be done,
If judgment aught may profit us; ourselves
To mingle in the fray I counsel not;
It were not well for wounded men to fight.”

Whom answer’d Agamemnon, King of men:
“Nestor, since to the ships the war is brought,
Nor hath the wall avail’d to stay their course,
Nor yet the deep-dug trench, on which we Greeks
Much toil bestow’d, and which we vainly hop’d
Might guard, impregnable, ourselves and ships;
Seems it the will of Saturn’s mighty son
That, far from Argos, from our native land,
We all should here in nameless graves be laid.
I knew when once he lov’d to aid the Greeks;
But now I see that to the blessed Gods
Our foes he equals, and our strength confounds.
Hear then my counsel; let us all agree
The ships that nearest to the sea are beach’d
To launch upon the main, till nightfall there
To ride at anchor: if that e’en by night
The Trojans may suspend their fierce assault;
Then may we launch in safety all the fleet.
No shame it is to fly, although by night,
Impending evil; better so to fly
Than by the threaten’d danger be o’erta’en.”

To whom, with scornful glance, Ulysses sage:
“What words have pass’d the barrier of thy lips,
Thou son of Atreus? counsellor of ill!
Would thou hadst been of some ignoble band
The leader, not the chief of such a host
As ours, on whom, from youth to latest age,
Jove hath the gift bestow’d, to bear the brunt
Of hardy war, till ev’ry man be slain.
And think’st thou so to leave the lofty walls
Of Troy, the object of our painful toil?
Be silent, that no other Greek may hear
Words, which no man might trust his tongue to speak,
Who nobler counsels understands, and wields
A royal sceptre, and th’ allegiance claims
Of numbers, such as those that own thy sway.
Thy counsels all I utterly condemn;
Who, ’mid the close and clamour of the fight,
Wouldst have us launch our ships, and give the foe,
Already too triumphant, cause renew’d
For boasting; then were death our certain lot;
For, if the ships he launch’d, not long will Greeks
Sustain the war, but with reverted eyes
Shrink from the fight; to such pernicious end
Would lead thy baneful counsels, mighty chief.”

Whom answer’d Agamemnon, King of men:
“Ulysses, thy rebuke hath wrung my soul;
Yet never meant I, that against their will
The sons of Greece should launch their well found ships:
But if there be who better counsel knows,
Or young or old, his words would please me well.”

Then rose the valiant Diomed, and said:
“The man is near at hand, nor far to seek,
If ye will hear, nor take offence, that I,
The youngest of you all, presume to speak.
Yet of a noble sire I boast me sprung,
Tydeus, who sleeps beneath the Theban soil:
To Portheus three brave sons were born, who dwelt
In Pleuron and in lofty Calydon,
Agrius, and Melas; bravest of them all,
My father’s father, Œneus, was the third.
He there remain’d; my father, wand’ring long,
To Argos came; such was the will of Jove
And of th’ Immortals all; he there espous’d
Adrastus’ daughter; own’d a wealthy house,
With fertile corn-lands round, and orchards stor’d
With goodly fruit-trees; num’rous flocks he had,
And all the Greeks in feats of arms excell’d.
Hear ye the words I speak, for they are true:
And if my speech be wise, despise it not,
As of one worthless, or ignobly born.
Though wounded, to the battle I advise
That we perforce repair; yet not ourselves
To join the combat, or confront the spears,
Lest wounds to wounds be added; but to rouse
The spirits of some, who, zealous heretofore,
How stand aloof, nor mingle in the fray.”

He said, and they, his words approving, went,
By Agamemnon led, the King of men.
Nor careless was the watch by Neptune kept:
With them, in likeness of an aged man,
He went, and Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
By the right hand he took, and thus address’d:

“O son of Atreus, great is now the joy
With which Achilles’ savage breast is fill’d,
Who sees the slaughter and the rout of Greeks:
For nought he has of heart, no, not a whit:
But perish he, accursed of the Gods!
Nor deem thou that to thee the blessed Gods
Are wholly hostile; yet again the chiefs
And councillors of Troy shall scour in flight
The dusty plain; and from the ships and tents
Thine eyes shall see them to the city fly.”

He said; and loudly shouting, onward rush’d.
As of nine thousand or ten thousand men,
In deadly combat meeting, is the shout;
Such was the sound which from his ample chest
Th’ Earth-shaker sent; and ev’ry Greek inspir’d
With stern resolve to wage unflinching war.

Standing on high Olympus’ topmost peak,
The golden-throned Juno downward look’d,
And, busied in the glory-giving strife,
Her husband’s brother and her own she saw,
Saw, and rejoic’d; next, seated on the crest
Of spring-abounding Ida, Jove she saw,
Sight hateful in her eyes! then ponder’d deep
The stag-ey’d Queen, how best she might beguile
The wakeful mind of aegis-bearing Jove;
And, musing, this appear’d the readiest mode:
Herself with art adorning, to repair
To Ida; there, with fondest blandishment
And female charm, her husband to enfold
In love’s embrace; and gentle, careless sleep
Around his eyelids and his senses pour.
Her chamber straight she sought, by Vulcan built,
Her son; by whom were to the door-posts hung
Close-fitting doors, with secret keys secur’d,
That, save herself, no God might enter in.
There enter’d she, and clos’d the shining doors;
And with ambrosia first her lovely skin
She purified, with fragrant oil anointing,
Ambrosial, breathing forth such odours sweet,
That, wav’d above the brazen floor of Jove,
All earth and Heav’n were with the fragrance fill’d;
O’er her fair skin this precious oil she spread;
Comb’d out her flowing locks, and with her hand
Wreath’d the thick masses of the glossy hair,
Immortal, bright, that crown’d th’ imperial head.
A robe ambrosial then, by Pallas wrought,
She donn’d, in many a curious pattern trac’d,
With golden brooch beneath her breast confin’d.
Her zone, from which a hundred tassels hung,
She girt about her; and, in three bright drops,
Her glitt’ring gems suspended from her ears;
And all around her grace and beauty shone.
Then o’er her head th’ imperial Goddess threw
A beauteous veil, new-wrought, as sunlight white;
And on her well-turn’d feet her sandals bound.
Her dress completed, from her chamber forth
She issued, and from th’ other Gods apart
She call’d to Venus, and address’d her thus:
“Say, wilt thou grant, dear child, the boon I ask?
Or wilt thou say me nay, in wrath that I
Espouse the Greek, as thou the Trojan cause?”

To whom the laughter-loving Venus thus:
“Daughter of Saturn, Juno, mighty Queen,
Tell me thy wish; to grant it if my pow’r
May aught avail, thy pleasure shall be done.”

To whom great Juno thus, with artful speech:
“Give me the loveliness, and pow’r to charm,
Whereby thou reign’st o’er Gods and men supreme.
For to the bounteous Earth’s extremest bounds
I go, to visit old Oceanus,
The sire of Gods, and Tethys, who of yore
From Rhaea took me, when all-seeing Jove
Hurl’d Saturn down below the earth and seas,
And nurs’d me in their home with tend’rest care;
I go to visit them, and reconcile
A lengthen’d feud; for since some cause of wrath
Has come between them, they from rites of love
And from the marriage-bed have long abstain’d:
Could I unite them by persuasive words,
And to their former intercourse restore,
Their love and rev’rence were for ever mine.”

Whom answer’d thus the laughter-loving Queen:
“I ought not, and I cannot, say thee nay,
Who liest encircled by the arms of Jove.”

Thus Venus spoke; and from her bosom loos’d
Her broider’d cestus, wrought with ev’ry charm
To win the heart; there Love, there young Desire,
There fond Discourse, and there Persuasion dwelt,
Which oft enthralls the mind of wisest men.
This in her hand she plac’d, as thus she spoke:
“Take thou from me, and in thy bosom hide,
This broider’d cestus; and, whate’er thy wish,
Thou shalt not here ungratified return.”

Thus Venus; smil’d the stag-ey’d Queen of Heav’n,
And, smiling, in her bosom hid the gift.
Then Venus to her father’s house return’d;
But Juno down from high Olympus sped;
O’er sweet Emathia, and Pieria’s range,
O’er snowy mountains of horse-breeding Thrace,
Their topmost heights, she soar’d, nor touch’d the earth.
From Athos then she cross’d the swelling sea,
Until to Lemnos, godlike Thoas’ seat,
She came; there met she Sleep, twin-born with Death,
Whom, as his hand she clasp’d, she thus address’d:

“Sleep, universal King of Gods and men,
If ever thou hast listen’d to my voice,
Grant me the boon which now I ask, and win
My ceaseless favour in all time to come.
When Jove thou seest in my embraces lock’d,
Do thou his piercing eyes in slumber seal.
Rich guerdon shall be thine; a gorgeous throne,
Immortal, golden; which my skilful son,
Vulcan, shall deftly frame; beneath, a stool
Whereon at feasts thy feet may softly rest.”

Whom answer’d thus the gentle God of Sleep:
“Daughter of Saturn, Juno, mighty Queen,
On any other of th’ immortal Gods
I can with ease exert my slumb’rous pow’r;
Even to the stream of old Oceanus,
Prime origin of all; but Saturn’s son,
Imperial Jove, I dare not so approach,
Nor sink in sleep, save by his own desire.
Already once, obeying thy command,
A fearful warning I receiv’d, that day
When from the capture and the sack of Troy
That mighty warrior, son of Jove, set sail;
For, circumfus’d around, with sweet constraint
I bound the sense of aegis-bearing Jove,
While thou, with ill-design, rousing the force
Of winds tempestuous o’er the stormy sea,
Didst cast him forth on Coos’ thriving isle,
Far from his friends; then Jove, awaking, pour’d
His wrath, promiscuous, on th’ assembled Gods;
Me chief his anger sought; and from on high
Had hurl’d me, plung’d beneath th’ unfathom’d sea,
But Night, the vanquisher of Gods and men,
Her fugitive received me; he his wrath
Repress’d, unwilling to invade the claims
Of holy Night; and now thou fain wouldst urge
That I another reckless deed essay.”

Whom answer’d thus the stag-ey’d Queen of Heav’n:
“Why, Sleep, with thoughts like these perplex thy mind
Think’st thou that Jove as ardently desires
To aid the men of Troy, as fiercely burn’d
His anger on his valiant son’s behalf?
Grant my request; and of the Graces one,
The youngest and the fairest, have to wife,
Pasithea, whom thy love hath long pursued.”

Thus promis’d Juno; Sleep, rejoicing, heard,
And answer’d thus: “Swear then the awful oath.
Inviolable, by the stream of Styx,
Thy one hand laid upon the fruitful earth,
The other resting on the sparkling sea;
That all the Gods who in the nether realms
With Saturn dwell, may of our solemn bond
Be witnesses, that of the Graces one,
The youngest, fairest, I shall have to wife,
Pasithea, whom my love hath long pursued.”

He said: nor did the white-arm’d Queen refuse;
She took the oath requir’d; and call’d by name
On all the Titans, sub-Tartarean Gods:
Then, sworn and ratified the oath, they pass’d
From Lemnos, and from Imbros, veil’d in cloud,
Skimming their airy way; on Lectum first,
In spring-abounding Ida, nurse of beasts,
The sea they left, and journey’d o’er the land,
While wav’d beneath their feet the lofty woods.
There Sleep, ere yet he met the eye of Jove,
Remain’d; and, mounted on a lofty pine,
The tallest growth of Ida, that on high
Flung through the desert air its boughs to Heav’n,
Amid the pine’s close branches lay ensconc’d;
Like to a mountain bird of shrillest note,
Whom Gods the Chalcis, men the night-hawk call.
Juno meanwhile to Ida’s summit sped,
To Gargarus; the Cloud-compeller saw;
He saw, and sudden passion fir’d his soul,
As when, their parents’ eyes eluding, first
They tasted of the secret joys of love.
He rose to meet her, and address’d her thus:

“From high Olympus, Juno, whither bound,
And how, to Ida hast thou come in haste?
For horses here or chariot hast thou none.”

To whom thus Juno with deceitful speech
Replied: “To fertile earth’s extremest bounds
I go, to visit old Oceanus,
The sire of Gods, and Tethys, who of yore
Receiv’d, and nurtur’d me with tend’rest care.
I go to visit them, and reconcile
A lengthen’d feud; for since some cause of wrath
Has come between them, they from rites of love
And from the marriage-bed have long abstain’d.
Meanwhile at spring-abounding Ida’s foot
My horses wait me, that o’er land and sea
Alike my chariot bear; on thine account
From high Olympus hither have I come,
Lest it displease thee, if, to thee unknown,
I sought the Ocean’s deeply-flowing stream.”
To whom the Cloud-compeller thus replied:
“Juno, thy visit yet awhile defer;
And let us now in love’s delights indulge:
For never yet did such a flood of love
For Goddess or for mortal fill my soul;
Not for Ixion’s beauteous wife, who bore
Pirithous, sage in council as the Gods;
Nor the neat-footed maiden Danae,
Acrisius’ daughter, her who Perseus bore,
Th’ observ’d of all; nor noble Phoenix’ child,
Who bore me Minos, and the godlike might
Of Rhadamanthus; nor for Semele,
Nor for Alcmena fair, of whom was born
In Thebes the mighty warrior Hercules,
As Bacchus, joy of men, of Semele:
No, nor for Ceres, golden-tressed Queen,
Nor for Latona bright, nor for thyself,
As now with fond desire for thee I burn.”

To whom thus Juno with deceitful speech:
“What words, dread son of Saturn, dost thou speak?
If here on Ida, in the face of day,
We celebrate the mystic rites of love.
How if some other of th’ immortal Gods
Should find us sleeping, and ’mid all the Gods
Should spread the tale abroad? I could not then
Straight to thy house, for very shame, return.
But if indeed such passion fill thy soul,
Thou hast thy secret chamber, built for thee
By Vulcan, with close-fitting doors secur’d;
Thither, if such thy pleasure, go we now.”

To whom the Cloud-compeller thus replied:
“Juno, nor fear the eye of God or man;
For all around us I will throw such veil
Of golden cloud, that not the sun himself
With sharpest beam of light may pierce it through.”

Thus saying, in his arms he clasp’d his wife;
The teeming earth beneath them caus’d to spring
The tender grass, and lotus dew-besprent,
Crocus and hyacinth, a fragrant couch,
Profuse and soft, upspringing from the earth.
There lay they, all around them spread a veil
Of golden cloud, whence heav’nly dews distill’d.
There on the topmost height of Gargarus,
By sleep and love subdued, th’ immortal Sire,
Clasp’d in his arms his wife, repos’d in peace.

Then Sleep arose, and to the Grecian ships
In haste repairing, to th’ Earth-shaking King
His tidings bore; and standing at his side
Thus to the God his winged words address’d:

“Now, Neptune, to the Greeks thy ready aid
Afford, that short-liv’d triumph they may gain,
While slumber holds the eyes of Jove; for I
In sweet unconsciousness have drown’d his sense,
Beguil’d by Juno, in whose arms he lies.”

He said, and vanish’d ’mid the tribes of men:
But fir’d with keener zeal to aid the Greeks,
Neptune sprang forth in front, and call’d aloud:

“Again, ye Greeks, shall our remissness yield
The victory to Hector, Priam’s son,
To seize our ships, and endless glory gain?
Such is his boast and menace, since in wrath
Achilles still beside his ships remains.
Yet him we scarce should miss, if we, the rest,
But firmly stood for mutual defence.
Hear then my counsel: let us all agree,
Girt with our best and broadest shields, our heads
With flashing helmets guarded, in our hands
Grasping our longest spears, to dare the fight.
Myself will lead you on; and Priam’s son,
Though bold he be, will fear with me to cope.
And if, among our bravest, any bear
Too small a buckler, with some meaner man
Let him exchange, and don the larger shield.”

He said, and they assenting heard his speech.
The Kings themselves, Ulysses, Diomed,
And mighty Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
Though sorely wounded, yet the troops array’d;
Thro’out the ranks they pass’d, and chang’d the arms;
The bravest donn’d the best, the worse the worst.
When with their dazzling armour all were girt,
Forward they mov’d; th’ Earth-shaker led them on:
In his broad hand an awful sword he bore,
Long-bladed, vivid as the lightning’s flash:
Yet in the deadly strife he might not join,
But kindled terror in the minds of men.

Hector meantime the Trojan troops array’d.
Then fiercer grew, and more intense the strain
Of furious fight, when Ocean’s dark-hair’d King
And Priam’s noble son were met in arms,
And aided, this the Trojans, that the Greeks.
High tow’rd the tents uprose the surging sea,
As with loud clamour met th’ opposing hosts.
Less loud the roar of Ocean’s wave, that driv’n
By stormy Boreas, breaks upon the beach;
Less loud the crackling of the flames that rage
In the deep forest of some mountain glen;
Less loud the wind, to wildest fury rous’d,
Howls in the branches of the lofty oaks;
Than rose the cry of Trojans and of Greeks,
As each, with furious shout, encounter’d each.
At Ajax first, who straight before him stood,
Great Hector threw his spear, nor miss’d his aim,
Where the two belts, the one which bore his shield,
His silver-studded sword the other, met
Across his breast; these two his life preserv’d.
Hector was wroth, that from his stalwart hand
The spear had flown in vain; and back he sprang
For safety to his comrades’ shelt’ring ranks:
But mighty Ajax Telamon upheav’d
A pond’rous stone, of many, all around
That scatter’d lay beneath the warriors’ feet,
And serv’d to prop the ships; with one of these,
As Hector backward stepp’d, above the shield
He smote him on the breast, below the throat.
With whirling motion, circling as it flew,
The mass he hurl’d. As by the bolt of Heav’n
Uprooted, prostrate lies some forest oak;
The sulph’rous vapour taints the air; appall’d,
Bereft of strength, the near beholder stands,
And awestruck hears the thunder-peal of Jove;
So in the dust the might of Hector lay:
Dropp’d from his hand the spear; the shield and helm
Fell with him; loud his polished armour rang.
On rush’d, with joyous shout, the sons of Greece,
In hope to seize the spoil; thick flew the spears:
Yet none might reach or wound the fallen chief;
For gather’d close around, the bravest all,
Valiant Æneas, and Polydamas,
Godlike Agenor, and the Lycian chief
Sarpedon, and the noble Glaucus stood.
Nor did the rest not aid; their shields’ broad orbs
Before him still they held, while in their arms
His comrades bore him from the battle-field,
To where, with charioteer and well-wrought car,
Beyond the fight, his flying coursers stood,
Which bore him, deeply groaning, tow’rd the town.
But when the ford was reach’d of Xanthus’ stream,
Broad-flowing, eddying, by immortal Jove
Begotten, on the ground they laid him down,
And dash’d the cooling water on his brow:
Reviv’d, he lifted up awhile his eyes;
Then on his knees half rising, he disgorg’d
The clotted blood; but backward to the earth,
Still by the blow subdu’d, again he fell,
And darkling shades of night his eyes o’erspread.

Onward, with zeal redoubled, press’d the Greeks,
When Hector from the field they saw withdrawn.
Foremost of all, Oileus’ active son,
With sudden spring assailing, Satnius slew:
Him a fair Naiad nymph to Œnops bore,
Who by the banks of Satnois kept his herds.
Him then, approaching near, Oileus’ son
Thrust through the flank: he fell, and o’er his corpse
Trojans and Greeks in stubborn fight engag’d.
But Panthous’ son a swift avenger came,
Polydamas, with brandish’d spear, and struck
Through the right shoulder Prothoenor, son
Of Areilycus; right through was driv’n
The sturdy spear; he, rolling in the dust,
Clutch’d with his palms the ground; then, shouting loud,
Thus with triumphant boast Polydamas:

“From the strong hand of Panthous’ noble son
Methinks that not in vain the spear has flown:
A Greek now bears it off; and he, perchance,
May use it as a staff to Pluto’s realm.”

Thus he; the Greeks with pain his vaunting heard;
But chief it rous’d the spirit within the breast
Of Ajax Telamon, whom close beside
The dead had fall’n; he at Polydamas,
Retreating, hurl’d in haste his glitt’ring spear;
He, springing sideways, ’scap’d the stroke of fate;
But young Archilochus, Antenor’s son,
Receiv’d the spear, for Heav’n had will’d his death:
The spine it struck, the topmost joint, where met
The head and neck, and both the tendons broke;
Forward he fell; and ere or knee or leg,
His head, and mouth, and nostrils struck the ground.

Then Ajax, in his turn, exulting, thus:
“Say now, Polydamas, and tell me true,
May this be deem’d for Prothoenor’s death
A full equivalent? no common man
He seems, and born of no ignoble race;
Valiant Antenor’s brother, or perchance
His son; the likeness speaks him near akin.”

Thus he, though well he knew; then bitter grief
Possess’d the Trojans’ souls; but Acamas,
Guarding his brother’s body, with his spear
Slew the Bœotian Promachus, who fain
Would by the feet have drawn away the dead:
Then Acamas, exulting, cried aloud:

“Ye wretched Greeks, in boasting measureless!
Not ours alone the labour and the loss
Of battle; ye too have your share of death.
Behold where lies your Promachus, subdued
Beneath my spear; not long unpaid the debt
Due for my brother’s blood! ’Tis well for him
Who leaves a brother to avenge his fate.”

Thus he; the Greeks with pain his vaunting heard;
But chief it rous’d the spirit within the breast
Of Peneleus; on Acamas he sprang,
Who waited not th’ encounter; next he slew
Ilioneus, the son of Phorbas, Lord
Of num’rous flocks, of all the Trojans most
Belov’d of Hermes, who his wealth increas’d.
To him Ilioneus, an only son,
His mother bore; who now, beneath the brow
And through the socket of the eye was struck,
Thrusting the eyeball out; for through the eye,
And backward through the head, the spear was driv’n:
With hands extended, down to earth he sank;
But Peneleus his weighty sword let fall
Full on his neck; the sever’d head and helm
Together fell, remaining still infix’d
The sturdy spear; then he, the gory head
Uplifting, to the Trojans vaunting cried:

“Go now, ye Trojans! bid that in the house
Of brave Ilioneus his parents raise
The voice of wailing for their gallant son;
As neither shall the wife of Promachus,
The son of Alegenor, with glad smile
Her husband’s coming hail, when home from Troy
We sons of Greece, with vict’ry crown’d, return.”

Thus as he spoke, pale fear possess’d them all,
Each looking round to seek escape from death.

Say now, ye Nine, who on Olympus dwell,
Who, when th’ Earth-shaker turn’d the tide of war,
First bore away his foeman’s bloody spoils?

Great Ajax Telamon first Hyrtius smote,
The son of Gyrtius, who to battle led
The warlike Mysians; next Antilochus
From Mermerus and Phalces stripp’d their arms;
Meriones Hippotion gave to death,
And Morys; Teucer Periphetes slew,
And Prothoon; Menelaus, through the flank
Smote Hyperenor; as the grinding spear
Drain’d all his vitals, through the gaping wound
His spirit escap’d, and darkness clos’d his eyes.
But chiefest slaughter of the Trojans wrought
Oileus’ active son; of all the Greeks
No foot so swift as his, when Jove had fill’d
Their souls with fear, to chase the flying foe.





Now when the Trojans had recross’d the trench
And palisades, and in their headlong flight
Many had fall’n by Grecian swords, the rest,
Routed, and pale with fear, made head awhile
Beside their cars; then Jove on Ida’s height
At golden-throned Juno’s side awoke;
Rising, he saw the Trojans and the Greeks,
Those in confusion, while behind them press’d
The Greeks, triumphant, Neptune in their midst:
He saw too Hector stretch’d upon the plain,
His comrades standing round; senseless he lay,
Drawing short breath, blood gushing from his mouth;
For by no feeble hand the blow was dealt.

Pitying, the Sire of Gods and men beheld,
And thus, with sternest glance, to Juno spoke:
“This, Juno, is thy work! thy wicked wiles
Have Hector quell’d, and Trojans driv’n to flight:
Nor know I but thyself mayst reap the fruit,
By shameful scourging, of thy vile deceit.
Hast thou forgotten how in former times
I hung thee from on high, and to thy feet
Attach’d two pond’rous anvils, and thy hands
With golden fetters bound, which none might break?
There didst thou hang amid the clouds of Heav’n;
Through all Olympus’ breadth the Gods were wroth;
Yet dar’d not one approach to set thee free.
If any so had ventur’d, him had I
Hurl’d from Heav’n’s threshold till to earth he fell,
With little left of life. Yet was not quench’d
My wrath on godlike Hercules’ account,
Whom thou, with Boreas, o’er the wat’ry waste
With fell intent didst send; and tempest-toss’d,
Cast him ashore on Coos’ fruitful isle.
I rescued him from thence, and brought him back,
After long toil, to Argos’ grassy plains.
This to thy mind I bring, that thou mayst learn
To cease thy treach’rous wiles, nor hope to gain
By all thy lavish’d blandishments of love,
Wherewith thou hast deceived me, and betray’d.”

He said; and terror seiz’d the stag-ey’d Queen;
Who thus with winged words address’d her Lord:

“By Earth I swear, and yon broad Heav’n above,
And Stygian stream beneath, the weightiest oath
Of solemn pow’r to bind the blessed Gods;
By thine own sacred head, our nuptial bed,
Whose holy tie I never could forswear;
That not by my suggestion and advice
Earth-shaking Neptune on the Trojan host,
And Hector, pours his wrath, and aids the Greeks;
In this he but obeys his own desire,
Who looks with pity on the Grecian host
Beside their ships o’erborne; and could my words
Prevail, my counsel were to shape his course,
O cloud-girt King, obedient to thy will.”

She said; the Sire of Gods and men, well pleas’d,
Her answer heard, and thus with gracious smile:

“If, stag-ey’d Queen, in synod of the Gods
Thy counsels shall indeed with mine agree,
Neptune, how strong soe’er his wish, must change
His course, obedient to thy will and mine;
And if in all sincerity thou speak,
Go to th’ assembled Gods, and hither send
Iris, and Phoebus of the silver bow;
That she may to the Grecian camp repair,
And bid that Neptune from the battle-field
Withdraw, and to his own domain retire;
While Phoebus Hector to the fight restores,
Inspiring new-born vigour, and allaying
The mortal pains which bow his spirit down:
Then, heartless fear infusing in the Greeks,
Put them to flight, that flying they may fall
Beside Achilles’ ships; his comrade then,
Patroclus, he shall send to battle forth
To be by Hector slain, in front of Troy;
Yet not to fall till many valiant youths
Have felt his prowess; and, amid the rest,
My son, Sarpedon; by his comrade’s death
Enrag’d, Achilles Hector shall subdue;
Thenceforth my counsel is, that from the ships
The Trojan force shall still be backward driv’n,
Until at length, by Pallas’ deep designs,
The Greeks possess the lofty walls of Troy.
Yet will not I my anger intermit,
Nor suffer other of th’ immortal Gods
To aid the Greeks, till Peleus’ son behold
His wish accomplish’d, and the boon obtain’d
I promis’d once, and with a nod confirm’d,
That day when sea-born Thetis clasp’d my knees,
And pray’d me to avenge her warrior son.”

Thus he; the white-arm’d Queen of Heav’n submiss
His mandate heard; and from th’ Idaean mount
With rapid flight to high Olympus sped.
Swift as the mind of man, who many a land
Hath travell’d o’er, and with reflective thought
Recalls, “here was I such a day, or here,”
And in a moment many a scene surveys;
So Juno sped o’er intervening space;
Olympus’ heights she reach’d, and in the house
Of Jove appear’d amid th’ assembled Gods.
They at her coming rose, with golden cups
Greeting their Queen’s approach; the rest she pass’d,
And from the hand of fair-fac’d Themis took
The proffer’d cup, who first had run to meet,
And thus with winged words address’d the Queen:
“Juno, why com’st thou hither? and with looks
Of one distraught with, fear? hath Saturn’s son,
Thy mighty Lord, thus sore affrighted thee?”
To whom the white-arm’d Goddess, Juno, thus:

“Forbear thy questions, Themis; well thou know’st
How haughty and imperious is his mind;
Thou for the Gods in haste prepare the feast;
Then shalt thou learn, amid th’ Immortals all,
What evil he designs; nor all, I ween,
His counsels will approve, or men, or Gods,
Though now in blissful ignorance they feast.”

She said, and sat; the Gods, oppress’d with care,
Her farther speech awaited; on her lips
There dwelt indeed a smile, but not a ray
Pass’d o’er her dark’ning brow, as thus her wrath
Amid th’ assembled Gods found vent in words:

“Fools are we all, who madly strive with Jove,
Or hope, by access to his throne, to sway,
By word or deed, his course; from all apart,
He all our counsels heeds not, but derides;
And boasts o’er all th’ immortal Gods to reign
In unapproach’d pre-eminence of pow’r.
Prepare then each his sev’ral woe to bear;
On Mars e’en now, methinks, the blow hath fall’n;
Since in the fight, the man he loves the best,
And boasts his son, Ascalaphus, is slain.”
She said; and Mars, enrag’d, his brawny thigh
Smote with his hands, and thus, lamenting, spoke:

“Blame not, ye Gods, who on Olympus dwell,
That to the Grecian ships I haste, to avenge
My slaughter’d son, though blasted by Heav’n’s fire
’Twere mine ’mid corpses, blood, and dust to lie.”

He said, and gave command to Fear and Flight
To yoke his car; and donn’d his glitt’ring arms.
Then from the throne of Jove had heavier wrath
And deeper vengeance on th’ Immortals fall’n,
But Pallas, in alarm for all the Gods,
Quitting in haste the throne whereon she sat,
Sprang past the vestibule, and from his head
The helmet lifted, from his arm the shield;
Took from his sturdy hand, and rear’d upright,
The brazen spear; then with reproachful words
She thus assail’d th’ impetuous God of War;

“Frantic, and passion-maddened, thou art lost!
Hast thou no ears to hear! or are thy mind
And sense of rev’rence utterly destroyed?
Or heard’st thou not what white-arm’d Juno spoke,
Fresh from the presence of Olympian Jove?
Wouldst thou, thine evil destiny fulfill’d,
By hard constraint, despite thy grief, be driv’n
Back to Olympus; and to all the rest
Confusion and disaster with thee bring?
At once from valiant Trojans and from Greeks
His thoughts would be diverted, and his wrath
Embroil Olympus, and on all alike,
Guilty or not, his anger would be pour’d.
Waive then thy vengeance for thy gallant son;
Others as brave of heart, as strong of arm,
Have fall’n, and yet must fall; and vain th’ attempt
To watch at once o’er all the race of men.”

Thus saying, to his seat again she forc’d
Th’ impetuous Mars: meanwhile, without the house,
Juno, by Jove’s command, Apollo call’d,
And Iris, messenger from God to God;
And thus to both her winged words address’d:

“Jove bids you with all speed to Ida haste;
And when, arriv’d, before his face ye stand,
Whate’er he orders, that observe and do.”

Thus Juno spoke, and to her throne return’d;
While they to spring-abounding Ida’s heights,
Wild nurse of forest beasts, pursued their way;
Th’ all-seeing son of Saturn there they found
Upon the topmost crag of Gargarus,
An incense-breathing cloud around him spread.
Before the face of cloud-compelling Jove
They stood; well-pleas’d he witness’d their approach
In swift obedience to his consort’s words,
And thus to Iris first his speech address’d:

“Haste thee, swift Iris, and to Ocean’s King
My message bear, nor misreporting aught,
Nor aught omitting; from the battle-field
Bid him retire, and join th’ assembled Gods,
Or to his own domain of sea withdraw.
If my commands he heed not, nor obey,
Let him consider in his inmost soul
If, mighty though he be, he dare await
My hostile coming; mightier far than him,
His elder born; nor may his spirit aspire
To rival me, whom all regard with awe.”

He said; swift-footed Iris, at the word,
From Ida’s heights to sacred Ilium sped.
Swift as the snow-flakes from the clouds descend,
Or wintry hail before the driving blast
Of Boreas, ether-born; so swift to Earth
Descended Iris; by his side she stood,
And with these words th’ Earth-shaking God address’d:
“A message, dark-hair’d Circler of the Earth,
To thee I bring from Ægis-bearing Jove.
He bids thee straightway from the battle-field
Retire, and either join th’ assembled Gods,
Or to thine own domain of sea withdraw.
If his commands thou heed not, nor obey,
Hither he menaces himself to come,
And fight against thee; but he warns thee first,
Beware his arm, as mightier far than thee,
Thine elder born; nor may thy spirit aspire
To rival him, whom all regard with awe.”

To whom in tow’ring wrath th’ Earth-shaking God:
“By Heav’n, though great he be, he yet presumes
Somewhat too far, if me, his equal born,
He seeks by force to baffle of my will.
We were three brethren, all of Rhaea born
To Saturn; Jove and I, and Pluto third,
Who o’er the nether regions holds his sway.
Threefold was our partition; each obtain’d
His meed of honour due; the hoary Sea
By lot my habitation was assign’d;
The realms of Darkness fell to Pluto’s share;
Broad Heav’n, amid the sky and clouds, to Jove;
But Earth, and high Olympus, are to all
A common heritage; nor will I walk
To please the will of Jove; though great he be,
With his own third contented let him rest:
Nor let him think that I, as wholly vile,
Shall quail before his arm; his lofty words
Were better to his daughters and his sons
Address’d, his own begotten; who perforce
Must listen to his mandates, and obey.”

To whom swift-footed Iris thus replied:
“Is this, then, dark-hair’d Circler of the Earth,
The message, stern and haughty, which to Jove
Thou bidd’st me bear? perchance thine angry mood
May bend to better counsels; noblest minds
Are easiest bent; and o’er superior age
Thou know’st th’ avenging Furies ever watch.”

To whom Earth-shaking Neptune thus replied:
“Immortal Iris, weighty are thy words,
And in good season spoken; and ’tis well
When envoys are by sound discretion led.
Yet are my heart and mind with grief oppress’d,
When me, his equal both by birth and fate,
He seeks with haughty words to overbear.
I yield, but with indignant sense of wrong.
This too I say, nor shall my threat be vain:
Let him remember, if in my despite,
’Gainst Pallas’, Juno’s, Hermes’, Vulcan’s will,
He spare to overthrow proud Ilium’s tow’rs,
And crown with victory the Grecian arms,
The feud between us never can be heal’d.”

Th’ Earth-shaker said, and from the field withdrew
Beneath the ocean wave, the warrior Greeks
His loss deploring; to Apollo then
The Cloud-compeller thus his speech address’d:

“Go straight to Hector of the brazen helm,
Good Phoebus; for beneath the ocean wave
Th’ Earth-shaker hath withdrawn, escaping thus
My high displeasure; had he dar’d resist,
The tumult of our strife had reach’d the Gods
Who in the nether realms with Saturn dwell.
Yet thus ’tis better, both for me and him,
That, though indignant, to my will he yields;
For to compel him were no easy task.
Take thou, and wave on high thy tassell’d shield,
The Grecian warriors daunting: thou thyself,
Far-darting King, thy special care bestow
On noble Hector; so restore his strength
And vigour, that in panic to their ships,
And the broad Hellespont, the Greeks be driv’n.
Then will I so by word and deed contrive
That they may gain fresh respite from their toil.”

He said, nor did Apollo not obey
His Sire’s commands; from Ida’s heights he flew,
Like to a falcon, swooping on a dove,
Swiftest of birds; then Priam’s son he found,
The godlike Hector, stretch’d at length no more,
But sitting, now to consciousness restor’d,
With recognition looking on his friends;
The cold sweat dried, nor gasping now for breath,
Since by the will of Ægis-bearing Jove
To life new waken’d; close beside him stood
The Far-destroyer, and address’d him thus:
“Hector, thou son of Priam, why apart
From all thy comrades art thou sitting here,
Feeble and faint? What trouble weighs thee down?”

To whom thus Hector of the glancing helm
With falt’ring voice: “Who art thou, Prince of Gods,
Who thus enquirest of me? know’st thou not
How a huge stone, by mighty Ajax hurl’d,
As on his comrades by the Grecian ships
I dealt destruction, struck me on the breast,
Dash’d to the earth, and all my vigour quell’d?
I deem’d in sooth this day my soul, expir’d,
Should see the dead, and Pluto’s shadowy realm.”

To whom again the far-destroying King:
“Be of good cheer; from Saturn’s son I come
From Ida’s height to be thy guide and guard;
Phoebus Apollo, of the golden sword,
I, who of old have thy protector been,
Thee and thy city guarding. Rise then straight;
Summon thy num’rous horsemen; bid them drive
Their flying cars to assail the Grecian ships:
I go before: and will thy horses’ way
Make plain and smooth, and daunt the warrior Greeks.”

His words fresh vigour in the chief infus’d.
As some proud steed, at well-fill’d manger fed,
His halter broken, neighing, scours the plain,
And revels in the widely-flowing stream
To bathe his sides; then tossing high his head,
While o’er his shoulders streams his ample mane,
Light-borne on active limbs, in conscious pride,
To the wide pastures of the mares he flies;
So vig’rous, Hector plied his active limbs,
His horsemen summoning at Heav’n’s command.

As when a rustic crowd of men and dogs
Have chas’d an antler’d stag, or mountain goat,
That ’mid the crags and thick o’ershadowing wood
Hath refuge found, and baffled their pursuit:
If, by the tumult rous’d, a lion stand,
With bristling mane, before them, back they turn,
Check’d in their mid career; ev’n so the Greeks,
Who late in eager throngs were pressing on,
Thrusting with swords and double-pointed spears,
When Hector moving through the ranks they saw,
Recoil’d, and to their feet their courage fell.
To whom thus Thoas spoke, Andraemon’s son,
Ætolia’s bravest warrior, skill’d to throw
The jav’lin, dauntless in the stubborn fight;
By few surpass’d in speech, when in debate
In full assembly Grecian youths contend.
He thus with prudent speech began, and said:

“Great is the marvel which our eyes behold,
That Hector see again to life restor’d,
Escap’d the death we hop’d him to have met
Beneath the hands of Ajax Telamon.
Some God hath been his guard, and Hector sav’d,
Whose arm hath slack’d the knees of many a Greek:
So will he now; for not without the aid
Of Jove, the Lord of thunder, doth he stand
So boldly forth, so eager for the fight.
Hear, then, and all by my advice be rul’d:
Back to the ships dismiss the gen’ral crowd;
While of our army we, the foremost men,
Stand fast, and meeting him with levell’d spears,
Hold him in check; and he, though brave, may fear
To throw himself amid our serried ranks.”

He said: they heard, and all obey’d his words:
The mighty Ajax, and Idomeneus
The King, and Teucer, and Meriones,
And Meges, bold as Mars, with all their best,
Their stedfast battle rang’d, to wait th’ assault
Of Hector and his Trojans; while behind,
Th’ unwarlike many to the ships retir’d.
The Trojan mass came on, by Hector led
With haughty stride; before him Phoebus went,
His shoulders veil’d in cloud; his arm sustain’d
The awful Ægis, dread to look on, hung
With shaggy tassels round and dazzling bright;
Which Vulcan, skilful workman, gave to Jove,
To scatter terror ’mid the souls of men.
This on his arm, the Trojan troops he led.
Firm stood the mass of Greeks; from either side
Shrill clamours rose; and fast from many a string
The arrows flew, and many a jav’lin, hurl’d
By vig’rous arms; some buried in the flesh
Of stalwart youths, and many, ere they reach’d
Their living mark, fell midway on the plain,
Fix’d in the ground, in vain athirst for blood.
While Phoebus motionless his Ægis held,
Thick flew the shafts, and fast the people fell
On either side; but when he turn’d its flash
Full in the faces of the astonish’d Greeks,
And shouted loud, their spirits within them quail’d,
Their fiery courage borne in mind no more.
As when two beasts of prey, at dead of night.
With sudden onset scatter wide a herd
Of oxen, or a num’rous flock of sheep,
Their keepers absent; so unnerv’d by fear
The Greeks dispers’d; such panic ’mid their ranks,
That vict’ry so might crown the Trojan arms,
Apollo sent; and as the masses broke,
Each Trojan slew his man; by Hector’s hand
Fell Stichius and Arcesilas; the one,
The leader of Bœotia’s brass-clad host,
The other, brave Menestheus’ trusted friend.
Æneas Medon slew, and Iasus;
Medon, the great Oileus’ bastard son,
Brother of Ajax; he in Phylace,
Far from his native home, was driv’n to dwell;
Since one to Eriopis near akin,
His sire Oileus’ wife, his hand had slain:
And Iasus, th’ Athenian chief, was deem’d
The son of Sphelus, son of Bucolus.
Polydamas amid the foremost ranks
Mecistes slew, Polites Echius,
Agenor Olonius; while from Paris’ hand
An arrow, ’mid the crowd of fugitives
Shot from behind, beneath the shoulder struck
Deiocus, and through his chest was driv’n:
These while the Trojans of their arms despoil’d,
Through ditch and palisades promiscuous dash’d
The flying Greeks, and gain’d, hard-press’d, the wall;
While loudly Hector to the Trojans call’d
To assail the ships, and leave the bloody spoils:
“Whom I elsewhere, and from the ships aloof
Shall find, my hand shall doom him on the spot;
For him no fun’ral pyre his kin shall light,
Or male or female; but before the wall
Our city’s dogs his mangled flesh shall tear.”

He said; and on his horses’ shoulder point
Let fall the lash, and loudly through the ranks
Call’d on the Trojans; they, with answ’ring shout
And noise unspeakable, urg’d on with him
Their harness’d steeds; Apollo, in the van,
Trod down with ease th’ embankment of the ditch,
And fill’d it in; and o’er it bridg’d a way
Level and wide, far as a jav’lin’s flight
Hurl’d by an arm that proves its utmost strength.
O’er this their columns pass’d; Apollo bore
His Ægis o’er them, and cast down the wall;
Easy, as when a child upon the beach,
In wanton play, with hands and feet o’erthrows
The mound of sand, which late in play he rais’d;
So, Phoebus, thou, the Grecian toil and pains
Confounding, sentest panic through their souls.
Thus hemm’d beside the ships they made their stand,
While each exhorted each, and all, with hands
Outstretch’d, to ev’ry God address’d their pray’r:
And chief, Gerenian Nestor, prop of Greece,
With hands uplifted tow’rd the starry Heav’n:

“O Father Jove! if any e’er to Thee
On corn-clad plains of Argos burnt the fat
Of bulls and sheep, and offer’d up his pray’r
For safe return; and thine assenting nod
Confirm’d thy promise; O remember now
His pray’r; stave off the pitiless day of doom,
Nor let the Greeks to Trojan arms succumb.”

Thus Nestor pray’d; loud thunder’d from on high
The Lord of counsel, as he heard the pray’r
Of Neleus’ aged son; with double zeal,
The Trojans, as the mind of Jove they knew,
Press’d on the Greeks, with warlike ardour fir’d.
As o’er the bulwarks of a ship pour down
The mighty billows of the wide-path’d sea,
Driv’n by the blast, that tosses high the waves,
So down the wall, with shouts, the Trojans pour’d;
The cars admitted, by the ships they fought
With double-pointed spears, and hand to hand;
These on their chariots, on the lofty decks
Of their dark vessels those, with pond’rous spars
Which on the ships were stor’d for naval war,
Compact and strong, their heads encas’d in brass.

While yet beyond the ships, about the wall
The Greeks and Trojans fought, Patroclus still
Within the tent of brave Eurypylus
Remaining, with his converse sooth’d the chief,
And healing unguents to his wound applied,
Of pow’r to charm away the bitter pains;
But when the Trojans pouring o’er the wall,
And routed Greeks in panic flight he saw,
Deeply he groan’d, and smiting on his thigh
With either palm, in anguish thus he spoke:

“Eurypylus, how great soe’er thy need,
I can no longer stay; so fierce the storm
Of battle rages; but th’ attendants’ care
Will all thy wants supply; while I in haste
Achilles seek, and urge him to the war;
Who knows but Heav’n may grant me to succeed?
For great is oft a friend’s persuasive pow’r.”
He said, and quickly on his errand sped.

Meanwhile the Greeks, in firm array, endur’d
The onset of the Trojans; nor could these
The assailants, though in numbers less, repel;
Nor those again the Grecian masses break,
And force their passage through the ships and tents,
As by a rule, in cunning workman’s hand,
Who all his art by Pallas’ aid has learnt,
A vessel’s plank is smooth and even laid,
So level lay the balance of the fight.
Others round other ships maintain’d the war,
But Hector that of Ajax sought alone.
For that one ship they two unwearied toil’d;
Nor Hector Ajax from his post could move,
And burn the ship with fire; nor he repel
The foe who came protected by a God.
Then noble Ajax with his jav’lin smote
Caletor, son of Clytius, through the breast,
As tow’rd the ship a blazing torch he bore;
Thund’ring he fell, and dropp’d his hand the torch.
But Hector, when his eyes his kinsman saw
By the dark vessel, prostrate in the dust,
On Trojans and on Lycians call’d aloud:

“Trojans and Lycians, and ye Dardans, fam’d
In close encounter, in this press of war
Slack not your efforts; haste to save the son
Of Clytius, nor let Greeks his arms possess,
Who ’mid their throng of ships has nobly fall’n.”
At Ajax, as he spoke, his gleaming spear
He threw, but miss’d his aim; yet Lycophron,
His comrade, of Cythera, Mastor’s son
(Who flying from Cythera’s lovely isle
With guilt of bloodshed, near to Ajax dwelt),
Standing beside the chief, above the ear
He struck, and pierc’d the brain: from the tall prow
Backwards he fell, his limbs relax’d in death.
Then Ajax, shudd’ring, on his brother call’d:

“Good Teucer, we have lost a faithful friend,
The son of Mastor, our Cytheran guest,
Whom as a father all rever’d; who now
Lies slain by noble Hector. Where are then
Thine arrows, swift-wing’d messengers of fate,
And where thy trusty bow, Apollo’s gift?”

Thus Ajax; Teucer heard, and ran in haste,
And stood beside him, with his bended bow,
And well-stor’d quiver: on the Trojans fast
He pour’d his shafts; and struck Pisenor’s son,
Clitus, the comrade of Polydamas,
The noble son of Panthous; he the reins
Held in his hand, and all his care bestow’d
To guide his horses; for, where’er the throng
Was thickest, there in Hector’s cause, and Troy’s,
He still was found; but o’er him hung the doom
Which none might turn aside; for from behind
The fateful arrow struck him through the neck;
Down from the car he fell; swerving aside,
The startled horses whirl’d the empty car.
Them first the King Polydamas beheld,
And stay’d their course; to Protiaon’s son,
Astynous, then he gave them, with command
To keep good watch, and still be near at hand;
Then ’mid the foremost join’d again the fray.
Again at Hector of the brazen helm
An arrow Teucer aim’d; and had the shaft
The life of Hector quench’d in mid career,
Not long the fight had rag’d around the ships:
But Jove’s all-seeing eye beheld, who watch’d
O’er Hector’s life, and Teucer’s hopes deceiv’d.
The bow’s well-twisted string he snapp’d in twain,
As Teucer drew; the brass-tipp’d arrow flew
Wide of the mark, and dropp’d his hand the bow.
Then to his brother, all aghast, he cried:
“O Heav’n, some God our best-laid schemes of war
Confounds, who from my hand hath, wrench’d the bow,
And snapp’d the newly-twisted string, which I
But late attach’d, my swift-wing’d shafts to bear.”

Whom answer’d thus great Ajax Telamon:
“O friend, leave there thine arrows and thy bow,
Marr’d by some God who grudges our renown;
But take in hand thy pond’rous spear, and cast
Thy shield about thy shoulders, and thyself
Stand forth, and urge the rest, to face the foe.
Let us not tamely yield, if yield we must,
Our well-built ships, but nobly dare the fight.”

“Thus Ajax spoke; and Teucer in the tent
Bestowed his bow, and o’er his shoulders threw
His fourfold shield; and on his firm-set head
A helm he plac’d, well-wrought, with horsehair plume,
That nodded, fearful, o’er his brow; his hand
Grasp’d the firm spear, with sharpen’d point of brass:
Then ran, and swiftly stood by Ajax’ side.
Hector meanwhile, who saw the weapon marr’d,
To Trojans and to Lycians call’d aloud:

“Trojans and Lycians, and ye Dardans fam’d
In close encounter, quit ye now like men;
Against the ships your wonted valour show.
E’en now, before our eyes, hath Jove destroy’d
A chieftain’s weapon. Easy ’tis to trace
O’er human wars th’ o’erruling hand of Jove,
To whom he gives the prize of victory,
And whom, withholding aid, he minishes,
As now the Greeks, while we his favour gain.
Pour then your force united on the ships;
And if there be among you, who this day
Shall meet his doom, by sword or arrow slain,
E’en let him die! a glorious death is his
Who for his country falls; and dying, leaves
Preserv’d from danger, children, wife, and home,
His heritage uninjur’d, when the Greeks
Embarking hence shall take their homeward way.”

His words fresh courage rous’d in ev’ry breast.
Ajax, on th’ other side, address’d the Greeks:

“Shame on ye, Greeks! this very hour decides
If we must perish, or be sav’d, and ward
Destruction from our ships; and can ye hope
That each, if Hector of the glancing helm
Shall burn our ships, on foot can reach his home?
Or hear ye not, how, burning to destroy
Our vessels, Hector cheers his forces on?
Not to the dance, but to the fight he calls;
Nor better counsel can for us be found,
Than in close fight with heart and hand to join.
’Twere better far at once to die, than live
Hemm’d in and straiten’d thus, in dire distress,
Close to our ships, by meaner men beset.”

His words fresh courage rous’d in ev’ry breast.
Then Hector Schedius, Perimedes’ son,
The Thracian leader, slew; on th’ other side
Ajax the captain of the foot o’ercame,
Laodamas, Antenor’s noble son;
While of his arms Polydamas despoil’d
Cyllenian Otus, friend of Phyleus’ son,
The proud Epeians’ leader; Meges saw,
And rush’d upon him; but Polydamas,
Stooping, the blow evaded; him he miss’d;
For Phoebus will’d not Panthous’ son should fall
In the front rank contending; but the spear
Smote Croesmus through the breast; thund’ring he fell,
And from his corpse the victor stripp’d his arms.
Him Dolops, son of Lampus, spearman skill’d,
Well train’d in ev’ry point of war, assail’d
(The son of Lampus he, the prince of men,
Son of Laomedon); from close at hand
Forward he sprang, and thrust at Meges’ shield;
But him the solid corslet which he wore,
With breast and back-piece fitted, sav’d from harm:*
The corslet Phyleus brought from Ephyra,
By Selles’ stream; Euphetes, King of men,
Bestow’d it as a friendly gift, to wear
In battle for a guard from hostile spears;
Which from destruction now preserv’d his son.
Next Meges struck, with keen-edg’d spear, the crown
Of Dolops’ brass-bound, horsehair-crested helm,
Sev’ring the horsehair plume, which, brilliant late
With crimson dye, now lay defil’d in dust.
Yet fought he on, and still for vict’ry hop’d;
But warlike Menelaus to the aid
Of Meges came; of Dolops unobserv’d
He stood, and from behind his shoulder pierc’d;
The point, its course pursuing, through his breast
Was driv’n, and headlong on his face he fell.
Forthwith, advanc’d the two to seize the spoils;
But loudly Hector on his kinsmen call’d;
On all, but chief on Icetaon’s son,
The valiant Melanippus; he erewhile,
In far Percote, ere the foes appear’d,
Pastur’d his herds; but when the ships of Greece
Approach’d the shore, to Ilium back he came;
There, ’mid the Trojans eminent, he dwelt
In Priam’s house, belov’d as Priam’s son.
Him Hector call’d by name, and thus address’d:

“Why, Melanippus, stand we idly thus?
Doth not thy slaughter’d kinsmen touch thy heart?
See how they rush on Dolops’ arms to seize;
Then on! no distant war must now be wag’d,
But hand to hand, till or the Greeks be slain,
Or lofty Troy, with all her children, fall.”

He said, and led the way; him follow’d straight
The godlike chief; great Ajax Telamon
Meanwhile the Greeks encourag’d to the fight,
And cried, “Brave comrades, quit ye now like men;
Bear a stout heart; and in the stubborn fight
Let each to other mutual succour give;
By mutual succour more are sav’d than fall;
In timid flight nor fame nor safety lies.”

He said; and pond’ring well his words, they stood,
Firm in defence; as with a wall of brass
The ships they guarded; though against them Jove
Led on the Trojans; Menelaus then
With stirring words Antilochus address’d:
“Antilochus, than thou, of all the Greeks
Is none more active, or more light of foot;
None stronger hurls the spear; then from the crowd
Spring forth, and aim to reach some Trojan’s life.”

Thus saying, he withdrew; fir’d by his words,
Forth sprang the youth, and pois’d his glitt’ring spear,
Glancing around him; back the Trojans drew
Before his aim; nor flew the spear in vain;
But through the breast it pierc’d, as on he came,
Brave Melanippus, Icetaon’s son.
Thund’ring he fell, and loud his armour rang.
Forth sprang Antilochus, as springs a hound
Upon a fawn, which from its lair disturb’d
A hunter’s shaft has struck, and quell’d its pow’rs;
So, Melanippus, sprang to seize thy spoils
The stout Antilochus; but not unmark’d
Of Hector’s eye, who, hast’ning through the press,
Advanc’d to meet him; waited not th’ attack,
Bold warrior as he was, Antilochus,
But trembling fled: as when a beast of prey,
Conscious of evil deed, amid the herd
The guardian dog or herdsman’s self has slain,
And flies, ere yet th’ avenging crowd collect;
So fled the son of Nestor; onward press’d,
By Hector led, the Trojans; loud their shouts,
As on the Greeks their murd’rous shafts they pour’d:
Yet turn’d he, when his comrades’ ranks he reach’d.
Then on the ships, as rav’ning lions, fell
The Trojans: they but work’d the will of Jove,
Who still their courage rais’d, and quell’d the Greeks;
Of vict’ry these debarr’d, and those inspir’d;
For so he will’d, that Hector, Priam’s son,
Should wrap in fire the beaked ships of Greece,
And Thetis to the uttermost obtain
Her over-bold petition; yet did Jove,
The Lord of counsel, wait but to behold
The flames ascending from the blazing ships:
For from that hour the Trojans, backward driv’n,
Should to the Greeks the final triumph leave.
With such design, to seize the ships, he fir’d
Th’ already burning zeal of Priam’s son;
Fiercely he rag’d, as terrible as Mars
With brandish’d spear; or as a raging fire
’Mid the dense thickets on the mountain side.
The foam was on his lips; bright flash’d his eyes
Beneath his awful brows, and terribly
Above his temples wav’d amid the fray
The helm of Hector; Jove himself from Heav’n.
His guardian hand extending, him alone
With glory crowning ’mid the host of men;
But short his term of glory: for the day
Was fast approaching, when, with Pallas’ aid,
The might of Peleus’ son should work his doom.
Oft he essay’d to break the ranks, where’er
The densest and throng noblest arms he saw;
But strenuous though his efforts, all were vain:
They, mass’d in close array, his charge withstood;
Firm as a craggy rock, upstanding high,
Close by the hoary sea, which meets unmov’d
The boist’rous currents of the whistling winds,
And the big waves that bellow round its base;
So stood unmov’d the Greeks, and undismay’d.
At length, all blazing in his arms, he sprang
Upon the mass; so plunging down, as when
On some tall vessel, from beneath the clouds
A giant billow, tempest-nurs’d, descends;
The deck is drench’d in foam; the stormy wind
Howls in the shrouds; th’ affrighted seamen quail
In fear, but little way from death remov’d;
So quail’d the spirit in ev’ry Grecian breast.

As when a rav’ning lion on a herd
Of heifers falls, which on some marshy mead
Feed numberless, beneath the care of one,
Unskill’d from beasts of prey to guard his charge;
And while beside the front or rear he walks,
The lion on th’ unguarded centre springs,
Seizes on one, and scatters all the rest;
So Hector, led by Jove, in wild alarm
Scatter’d the Grecians all; but one alone,
Brave Periphetes, of Mycenæ, slew;
The son of Copreus, whom Eurystheus sent
His envoy to the might of Hercules;
Far nobler than the father was the son;
In speed of foot, in warlike might, in mind,
In all, among Mycenians foremost he;
Who now on Hector fresh renown conferr’d;
For, backward as he stepp’d, against the rim
Of the broad shield which for defence he bore,
Down reaching to his feet, he tripp’d, and thus
Entangled, backward fell; and as he fell,
Around his temples clatter’d loud his helm.
Hector beheld, and o’er him stood in haste,
And with his spear transfix’d his breast, and slew
Before his comrades’ eyes; yet dar’d not one,
Though grieving for their comrade’s loss, advance
To rescue; such of Hector was their awe.
They fronted now the ships; the leading prows
Which first were drawn on shore, still barr’d their way;
Yet on they stream’d; and from the foremost ships,
Now hardly press’d, the Greeks perforce retir’d;
But closely mass’d before the tents they stood,
Not scatter’d o’er the camp; by shame restrain’d,
And fear; and loudly each exhorted each.
Gerenian Nestor chief, the prop of Greece,
Thus by their fathers singly each adjur’d:
“Quit ye like men, dear friends; and think it shame
To forfeit now the praise of other men;
Let each man now his children and his wife,
His fortunes and his parents, bear in mind;
And not the living only, but the dead;
For them, the absent, I, your suppliant, pray,
That firm ye stand, and scorn disgraceful flight.”

His words fresh courage rous’d in ev’ry breast;
And from their eyeballs Pallas purg’d away
The film of darkness; and on ev’ry side,
Both tow’rd the ships and tow’rd the level fight,
Clear light diffus’d; there Hector they discern’d,
And all his comrades, those who stood aloof,
And those who near the ships maintain’d the war.
Then was not Ajax’ mighty soul content
To stand where stood the other sons of Greece;
Along the vessels’ lofty decks he mov’d
With haughty stride; a pond’rous boarding-pike,
Well polish’d, and with rivets well secur’d,
Of two and twenty cubits’ length, he bore,
As one well-skill’d in feats of horsemanship,
Who from a troop of horses on the plain
Has parted four, and down the crowded road,
While men and women all in wonder gaze,
Drives tow’rd the city; and with force untir’d
From one to other springs, as on they fly;
O’er many a vessel’s deck so Ajax pass’d
With lofty stride, and voice that reach’d to Heav’n,
As loudly shouting on the Greeks he call’d
To save their ships and tents: nor Hector stay’d
Amid the closely buckler’d Trojan ranks;
But, as upon a flock of birds, that feed
Beside a river’s bank, or geese, or cranes,
Or long-neck’d swans, a fiery eagle swoops;
So on the dark-prow’d ship with furious rush
Swept Hector down; him Jove with mighty hand
Sustain’d, and with him forward urg’d the crowd.
Fierce round the ships again the battle rag’d;
Well might ye deem no previous toil had worn
Their strength, who in that dread encounter met;
With edge so keen, and stubborn will they fought.
But varying far their hopes and fears: the Greeks
Of safety and escape from death despair’d;
While high the hopes in ev’ry Trojan’s breast,
To burn the ships, and slay the warlike Greeks;
So minded each, oppos’d in arms they stood.

On a swift-sailing vessel’s stern, that bore
Protesilaus to the coast of Troy,
But to his native country bore not thence,
Hector had laid his hand; around that ship
Trojans and Greeks in mutual slaughter join’d.
The arrow’s or the jav’lin’s distant flight
They waited not, but, fir’d with equal rage,
Fought hand to hand, with axe and hatchet keen,
And mighty swords, and double-pointed spears.
Many a fair-hilted blade, with iron bound,
Dropp’d from the hands, or from the sever’d arms,
Of warrior chiefs; the dark earth ran with blood:
Yet loos’d not Hector of the stern his hold,
But grasp’d the poop, and on the Trojans call’d;

“Bring fire, and all together loud and clear
Your war-cry raise; this day will Jove repay
Our labours all, with capture of those ships,
Which hither came, against the will of Heav’n,
And which on us unnumber’d ills have brought,
By our own Elders’ fault, who me, desiring
Ev’n at their vessels’ sterns to urge the war,
Withheld, and to the town the troops confin’d.
But Jove all-seeing, if he then o’errul’d
Our better mind, himself is now our aid.”

Thus he: they onward press’d with added zeal;
Nor Ajax yet endur’d, by hostile spears
Now sorely gall’d; yet but a little space,
Back to the helmsman’s sev’n-foot board he mov’d,
Expecting death; and left the lofty deck,
Where long he stood on guard; but still his spear
The Trojans kept aloof, whoe’er essay’d
Amid the ships to launch th’ unwearied flames;
And, loudly shouting, to the Greeks he call’d:

“Friends, Grecian heroes, ministers of Mars,
Quit ye like men! dear friends, remember now
Your wonted valour! think ye in your rear
To find supporting forces, or some fort
Whose walls may give you refuge from your foe?
No city is nigh, whose well-appointed tow’rs,
Mann’d by a friendly race, may give us aid;
But here, upon the well-arm’d Trojans’ soil,
And only resting on the sea, we lie
Far from our country; not in faint retreat,
But in our own good arms, our safety lies.”

He said; and with his sharp-edg’d spear his words
He follow’d up; if any Trojan dar’d,
By Hector’s call inspir’d, with fiery brand
To assail the ships, him with his ponderous spear
Would Ajax meet; and thus before the ships
Twelve warriors, hand to hand, his prowess felt.




Thus round the well-mann’d ship they wag’d the war:
Meanwhile by Peleus’ son Patroclus stood,
Weeping hot tears; as some dark-water’d fount
Pours o’er a craggy rock its gloomy stream;
Achilles, swift of foot, with pity saw,
And to his friend these winged words address’d:

“Why weeps Patroclus, like an infant girl,
That prays her mother, by whose side she runs,
To take her up; and, clinging to her gown,
Impedes her way, and still with tearful eyes
Looks in her face, until she take her up?
Ev’n as that girl, Patroclus, such art thou,
Shedding soft tears: hast thou some tidings brought
Touching the gen’ral weal, or me alone?
Or have some evil news from Phthia come,
Known but to thee? Menoetius, Actor’s son,
Yet surely lives; and ’mid his Myrmidons
Lives aged Peleus, son of Æacus:
Their deaths indeed might well demand our tears:
Or weep’st thou for the Greeks, who round their ships
By death their former insolence repay?
Speak out, that I may know thy cause of grief.”

To whom, with bitter groans, Patroclus thus:
“O son of Peleus, noblest of the Greeks,
Achilles, be not wroth! such weight of woe
The Grecian camp oppresses; in their ships
They who were late their bravest and their best,
Sore wounded all by spear or arrow lie;
The valiant son of Tydeus, Diomed,
Pierc’d by a shaft, Ulysses by a spear,
And Agamemnon’s self; Eurypylus
By a sharp arrow through the thigh transfix’d;
For these, the large resources of their art
The leeches ply, and on their wounds attend;
While thou, Achilles, still remain’st unmov’d.
Oh, be it never mine to nurse such hate
As thou retain’st, inflexibly severe!
Who e’er may hope in future days by thee
To profit, if thou now forbear to save
The Greeks from shame and loss? Unfeeling man!
Sure Peleus, horseman brave, was ne’er thy sire,
Nor Thetis bore thee; from the cold grey sea
And craggy rocks thou hadst thy birth; so hard
And stubborn is thy soul. But if the fear
Of evil prophesied thyself restrain,
Or message by thy Goddess-mother brought
From Jove, yet send me forth with all thy force
Of Myrmidons, to be the saving light
Of Greece; and let me to the battle bear
Thy glitt’ring arms, if so the men of Troy,
Scar’d by thy likeness, may forsake the field,
And breathing-time afford the sons of Greece,
Toil-worn; for little pause has yet been theirs.
Fresh and unwearied, we may drive with ease
To their own city, from our ships and tents,
The Trojans, worn and battle-wearied men.”

Thus pray’d he, all unwisely; for the pray’r
He utter’d, to himself was fraught with death;
To whom, much griev’d, Achilles, swift of foot:
“Heav’n-born Patroclus, oh, what words are these!
Of prophecy I reck not, though I know;
Nor message hath my mother brought from Jove;
But it afflicts my soul; when one I see
That basely robs his equal of his prize,
His lawful prize, by highest valour won;
Such grief is mine, such wrong have I sustain’d.
Her, whom the sons of Greece on me bestow’d,
Prize of my spear, the well-wall’d city storm’d,
The mighty Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
Hath borne by force away, as from the hands
Of some dishonour’d, houseless vagabond.
But let the past be past; I never meant
My wrath should have no end; yet had not thought
My anger to abate, till my own ships
Should hear the war-cry, and the battle bear,
But go, and in my well-known armour clad,
Lead forth the valiant Myrmidons to war,
Since the dark cloud of Trojans circles round
The ships in force; and on the shingly beach,
Pent up in narrow limits, lie the Greeks;
And all the city hath pour’d its numbers forth
In hope undoubting; for they see no more
My helm among them flashing; else in flight
Their dead would choke the streams, if but to me
Great Agamemnon bore a kindly mind:
But round the camp the battle now is wag’d.
No more the hands of valiant Diomed,
The Greeks protecting, hurl his fiery spear;
Nor hear I now, from his detested lips,
The shout of Agamemnon; all around
Is heard the warrior-slayer Hector’s voice,
Cheering his Trojans; with triumphant cries
They, from the vanquish’d Greeks, hold all the plain.
Nathless do thou, Patroclus, in defence
Fall boldly on, lest they with blazing fire
Our ships destroy, and hinder our retreat.
But hear, and ponder well the end of all
I have to say, and so for me obtain
Honour and glory in the eyes of Greece;
And that the beauteous maiden to my arms
They may restore, with costly gifts to boot.
The ships reliev’d, return forthwith; and though
The Thund’rer, Juno’s Lord, should crown thine arms
With triumph, be not rash, apart from me,
In combat with the warlike sons of Troy;
 (So should my name in less repute be held;)
Nor, in the keen excitement of the fight
And slaughter of the Trojans, lead thy troops
On tow’rd the city, lest thou find thyself
By some one of th’ immortal Gods oppos’d;
For the far-darting Phoebus loves them well;
But when in safety thou hast plac’d the ships,
Delay not to return, and leave the rest
To battle on the plain: for would to Jove,
To Pallas and Apollo, that not one,
Or Greek or Trojan, might escape from death,
Save only thou and I; that so we two
Alone might raze the sacred tow’rs of Troy.”

Such converse held they; while by hostile spears
Hard press’d, no longer Ajax might endure;
At once by Jove’s high will and Trojan foes
O’ermaster’d; loud beneath repeated blows
Clatter’d around his brow the glitt’ring helm,
As on the well-wrought crest the weapons fell;
And his left arm grew faint, that long had borne
The burthen of his shield; yet nought avail’d
The press of spears to drive him from his post;
Lab’ring he drew his breath, his ev’ry limb
With sweat was reeking; breathing space was none;
Blow follow’d blow; and ills were heap’d on ill.

Say now, ye Nine, who on Olympus dwell,
How first the fire assail’d the Grecian ships.

Hector approach’d, and on the ashen spear
Of Ajax, close behind the head, let fall
His mighty sword; right through he clove the wood;
And in his hand the son of Telamon
The headless shaft held bootless; far away,
Loud ringing, fell to earth the brazen point.
Ajax, dismayed, perceived the hand of Heaven,
And knew that Jove the Thunderer had decreed
To thwart his hopes, and victory give to Troy.
Slow he retir’d; and to the vessel they
The blazing torch applied; high rose the flame
Unquenchable, and wrapp’d the poop in fire.
The son of Peleus saw, and with his palm
Smote on his thigh, and to Patroclus call’d:
“Up, nobly born Patroclus, car-borne chief!
Up, for I see above the ships ascend
The hostile fires; and lest they seize the ships,
And hinder our retreat, do thou in haste
Thine armour don, while I arouse the troops.”

He said: his dazzling arms Patroclus donn’d:
First on his legs the well-wrought greaves he fix’d,
Fasten’d with silver clasps; his ample chest
The breastplate of Achilles, swift of foot,
Star-spangled, richly wrought, defended well;
Around his shoulders slung, his sword he bore,
Brass-bladed, silver-studded; next his shield
Weighty and strong; and on his firm-set head
A helm he wore, well-wrought, with horsehair plume
That nodded, fearful, o’er his brow; his hand
Grasp’d two stout spears, familiar to his hold.
One spear Achilles had, long, pond’rous, tough;
But this he touch’d not; none of all the Greeks,
None, save Achilles’ self, that spear could poise;
The far-fam’d Pelian ash, which to his sire,
On Pelion’s summit fell’d, to be the bane
Of mightiest chiefs, the Centaur Chiron gave.
Then to Automedon he gave command
To yoke the horses: him he honour’d most,
Next to Achilles’ self; the trustiest he
In battle to await his chief’s behest.
The flying steeds he harness’d to the car,
Xanthus and Balius, fleeter than the winds;
Whom, grazing in the marsh by ocean’s stream,
Podarge, swift of foot, to Zephyr bore:
And by their side the matchless Pedasus,
Whom from the capture of Eetion’s town
Achilles bore away; a mortal horse,
But with immortal coursers meet to vie.

Meantime Achilles, through their several tents,
Summon’d to arms the warlike Myrmidons.
They all, like rav’ning wolves, of courage high,
That on the mountain side have hunted down
An antler’d stag, and batten’d on his flesh:
Their chaps all dyed with blood, in troops they go,
With their lean tongues from some black-water’d fount
To lap the surface of the dark cool wave,
Their jaws with blood yet reeking, unsubdued
Their courage, and their bellies gorg’d with flesh;
So round Pelides’ valiant follower throng’d
The chiefs and rulers of the Myrmidons.
Achilles in the midst to charioteers
And buckler’d warriors issued his commands.
Fifty swift ships Achilles, dear to Jove,
Led to the coast of Troy; and rang’d in each
Fifty brave comrades mann’d the rowers’ seats.
O’er these five chiefs, on whom he most relied,
He plac’d, himself the Sov’reign Lord of all.
One band Menestheus led, with glancing mail,
Son of Sperchius, Heav’n-descended stream;
Him Peleus’ daughter, Polydora fair,
A mortal in a God’s embrace compress’d,
To stout Sperchius bore; but, by repute,
To Boras, Perieres’ son, who her
In public, and with ample dow’r, espous’d.
The brave Eudorus led the second band,
Whom Phylas’ daughter, Polymele fair,
To Hermes bore; the maid he saw, and lov’d,
Amid the virgins, mingling in the dance
Of golden-shafted Dian, Huntress-Queen;
He to her chamber access found, and gain’d
By stealth her bed; a valiant son she bore,
Eudorus, swift of foot, in battle strong.
But when her infant, by Lucina’s aid,
Was brought to light, and saw the face of day,
Her to his home, with ample dow’r enrich’d,
Echecles, son of Actor, bore away;
While him the aged Phylas kept, and nurs’d
With tender care, and cherish’d—as his own.
The brave Peisander, son of Maemalus,
The third commanded; of the Myrmidons,
Next to Pelides’ friend, the noblest spear.
The fourth, the aged warrior Phoenix led;
The fifth, Alcimedon, Laerces’ son:
These in their order due Achilles first
Array’d, and next with stirring words address’d:

“Ye Myrmidons, forget not now the vaunts
Which, while my wrath endur’d, ye largely pour’d
Upon the Trojans; me ye freely blam’d;
‘Ill-omen’d son of Peleus, sure in wrath
Thou wast conceiv’d, implacable, who here
In idleness enforc’d thy comrades keep’st!
’Twere better far our homeward way to take,
If such pernicious rancour fill thy soul!’
Thus ye reproach’d me oft! Lo! now ye have
The great occasion which your souls desir’d!
Then on, and with brave hearts the Trojans meet!”

His words fresh courage rous’d in ev’ry breast,
And more compact, beneath their monarch’s eye,
Their ranks were form’d; as when the builder lays
The closely-fitting stones, to form the wall
Of some great house, and brave the winds of Heav’n;
So close were fitted helm and bossy shield;
Buckler on buckler press’d, and helm on helm,
And man on man; the horsehair plumes above,
That nodded, fearful, from the warriors’ brows,
Each other touch’d; so closely mass’d they stood.
Before them all stood prominent in arms
Two chiefs, Patroclus and Automedon,
Both with one thought possess’d, to lead the fight
In the fore-front of all the Myrmidons.
Achilles then within his tent withdrew,
And of a gorgeous coffer rais’d the lid,
Well-wrought, by silver-footed Thetis plac’d
On board his ship, and fill’d with rich attire,
With store of wind-proof cloaks, and carpets soft.
There lay a goblet, richly chas’d, whence none,
But he alone, might drink the ruddy wine,
Nor might libations thence to other Gods
Be made, save only Jove: this brought he forth,
And first with sulphur purified, and next
Wash’d with pure water; then his hands he wash’d,
And drew the ruddy wine; then standing forth
Made in the centre of the court his pray’r,
And as he pour’d the wine, look’d up to Heav’n,
Not unbeheld of Jove, the lightning’s Lord:

“Great King, Dodona’s Lord, Pelasgian Jove,
Who dwell’st on high, and rul’st with sov’reign sway
Dodona’s wintry heights; where dwell around
Thy Sellian priests, men of unwashen feet,
That on the bare ground sleep; thou once before
Hast heard my pray’r, and me with honour crown’d,
And on the Greeks inflicted all thy plagues;
Hear yet again, and this my boon accord.
I ’mid the throng of ships myself remain;
But with a num’rous force of Myrmidons
I send my comrade in my stead to fight:
On him, all-seeing Jove, thy favour pour;
Strengthen his heart, that Hector’s self may learn
If, e’en alone, my follower knows to fight,
Or only then resistless pow’r displays,
When I myself the toil of battle share.
And from our vessels when the foe is driv’n,
Grant that with all his arms and comrades true
He may in safety to the ships return.”

Thus pray’d he; Jove, the Lord of counsel, heard,
And half his pray’r he granted, half denied:
For from the ships the battle to repel
He granted; but denied his safe return.
His pray’rs and off’rings ended, to the tent
Achilles turn’d again, and in the chest
Replac’d the cup; then issuing forth, he stood
Before the tent; for much he long’d to see
The Greeks and Trojans join in battle strife.
They who in arms round brave Patroclus stood
Their line of battle form’d, with courage high
To dash upon the Trojans; and as wasps
That have their nest beside the public road,
Which boys delight to vex and irritate
In wanton play, but to the gen’ral harm;
Them if some passing trav’ller unawares
Disturb, with angry courage forth they rush
In one continuous swarm, to guard their nest:
E’en with such courage pour’d the Myrmidons
Forth from the ships; then uproar wild arose,
And loud Patroclus on his comrades call’d:

“Ye valiant Myrmidons, who boast yourselves
Achilles’ comrades, quit ye now like men;
Your ancient valour prove; to Peleus’ son,
Of all the Greeks the noblest, so shall we,
His faithful followers, highest honour give;
And Agamemnon’s haughty self shall mourn
The slight on Grecia’s bravest warrior cast.”

His words fresh courage rous’d in ev’ry breast.
Thick on the Trojan host their masses fell;
While loud the fleet re-echoed to the sound
Of Grecian cheers; but when the Trojans saw,
Blazing in arms, Menoetius’ godlike son,
Himself, and follower; quail’d the spirits of all;
Their firm-set ranks were shaken; for they deem’d
Achilles had beside the ships exchang’d
His wrath for friendship; and each sev’ral man
Look’d round, to find his own escape from death.

Then first Patroclus aim’d his glitt’ring spear
Amid the crowd, where thickest round the ships
Of brave Protesilaus, raged the war;
And struck Pyraechmes, who from Amydon,
From the wide-flowing stream of Axius, led
The horsehair-crested Paeons; him he struck
Through the right shoulder; backwards in the dust
Groaning, he fell; around him quail’d with fear
His Paeons all, such terror in their ranks
Patroclus threw, their bravest leader slain,
The foremost in the fight; the crowd he drove
Far from the ships, and quench’d the blazing fire.
There lay the half-burnt ship; with shouts confus’d
The Trojans fled; and from amid the ships
Forth pour’d the Greeks; and loud the clamour rose.

As when around a lofty mountain’s top
The lightning’s Lord dispels a mass of cloud,
And ev’ry crag, and ev’ry jutting peak
Is plainly seen, and ev’ry forest glade;
And the deep vault of Heav’n is open’d wide;
So when the Greeks had clear’d the ships of fire,
They breath’d awhile; yet ceas’d not so the strife;
For not in headlong panic from the ships
The Trojans by the valiant Greeks were driv’n,
But, though perforce retiring, still made head.

Then of the chiefs, as wider spread the fight,
Each singled each; Menoetius’ noble son
First threw his pointed spear, and on the thigh
Struck Areilochus, in act to turn;
Right through the point was driv’n; the weighty spear
Shatter’d the bone, and prone to earth he fell.
The warlike Menelaus aim’d his spear
Where Thoas’ breast, unguarded by his shield,
Was left expos’d; and slack’d his limbs in death.
Phyleus’ brave son, as rush’d Amphiclus on,
Stood firm, with eye observant; then th’ attack
Preventing, through his thigh, high up, where lie
The strongest muscles, smote; the weapon’s point
Sever’d the tendons; darkness clos’d his eyes.
Of Nestor’s sons, Antilochus, the first,
Atymnius wounded, driving through his flank
He brazen spear; prone on his face he fell.
Then, burning to avenge his brother’s death,
Stood Maris o’er the corpse, and hand to hand
Engaged Antilochus; but ere a blow
Was struck, the godlike Thrasymedes drove
Through his right shoulder, with unerring aim,
His glitt’ring spear; the point his upper arm
Tore from the muscles, shatt’ring all the bone:
Thund’ring he fell, and darkness clos’d his eyes.
So to the shades, by those two brethren’s hands
Subdued, Sarpedon’s comrades brave were sent,
The sons of Amisodarus, who rear’d
The dread Chimaera, bane of mortal men.
On Cleobulus, wounded in the press,
Ajax Oileus sprang, and captive took,
Alive; but sudden on his neck let fall
His hilted sword, and quench’d the fire of life.
The hot blood dyed the sword; the darkling shades
Of death, and rig’rous fate, his eyes o’erspread.
Then Peneleus and Lycon, hand to hand,
Engag’d in combat; both had miss’d their aim,
And bootless hurl’d their weapons; then with swords
They met; first Lycon on the crested helm
Dealt a fierce blow; but in his hand the blade
Up to the hilt was shiver’d; then the sword
Of Peneleus his neck, below the ear,
Dissever’d; deeply in his throat the blade
Was plung’d, and by the skin alone was stay’d;
Down droop’d his head, his limbs relax’d in death.
Meriones by speed of foot o’ertook,
And, as his car he mounted, Acarnas
Though the right shoulder pierc’d; down from the car
He fell; the shades of death his eyes o’erspread.
Full on the mouth of Erymas was thrust
The weapon of Idomeneus; right through,
The white bones crashing, pass’d the brazen spear
Below the brain; his teeth were shatter’d all;
With blood, which with convulsive sobs he blew
From mouth and nostril, both his eyes were fill’d;
And death’s dark cloud encompass’d him around.
Thus slew the Grecian leaders each his man.

As rav’ning wolves, that lambs or kids assail,
Stray’d from their dams, by careless shepherds left
Upon the mountain scatter’d; these they see,
And tear at once their unresisting prey;
So on the Trojans fell the Greeks; in rout
Disastrous they, unmann’d by terror, fled.
Great Ajax still, unwearied, long’d to hurl
His spear at Hector of the brazen helm;
But he, well skill’d in war, his shoulders broad
Protected by his shield of tough bull’s hide,
Watch’d for the whizzing shafts, and jav’lins’ whirr.
Full well he knew the tide of battle turn’d,
Yet held his ground, his trusty friends to save.

As from Olympus, o’er the clear blue sky
Pour the dark clouds, when Jove the vault of Heav’n
O’erspreads with storm and tempest, from the ships
So pour’d with panic cries the flying host,
And in disorder’d rout recross’d the trench.
Then Hector’s flying coursers bore him safe
Far from the struggling masses, whom the ditch
Detain’d perforce; there many a royal car
With broken pole th’ unharness’d horses left.
On, shouting to the Greeks, Patroclus press’d
The flying Trojans; they, with panic cries,
Dispers’d, the roads encumber’d; high uprose
The storms of dust, as from the tents and ships
Back to the city stretch’d the flying steeds;
And ever where the densest throng appear’d
With furious threats Patroclus urg’d his course;
His glowing axle trac’d by prostrate men
Hurl’d from their cars, and chariots overthrown.
Flew o’er the deep-sunk trench th’ immortal steeds,
The noble prize the Gods to Peleus gave,
Still onward straining; for he long’d to reach,
And hurl his spear at Hector; him meanwhile
His flying steeds in safety bore away.

As in th’ autumnal season, when the earth
With weight of rain is saturate; when Jove
Pours down his fiercest storms in wrath to men,
Who in their courts unrighteous judgments pass,
And justice yield to lawless violence,
The wrath of Heav’n despising; ev’ry stream
Is brimming o’er: the hills in gullies deep
Are by the torrents seam’d, which, rushing down
From the high mountains to the dark-blue sea,
With groans and tumult urge their headlong course,
Wasting the works of man; so urg’d their flight,
So, as they fled, the Trojan horses groan’d.
The foremost ranks cut off, back tow’rd the ships
Patroclus drove them, baffling their attempts
To gain the city; and in middle space
Between the ships, the stream, and lofty wall,
Dealt slaughter round him, and of many a chief
The bitter penalty of death requir’d.
Then Pronous with his glitt’ring spear he struck,
Where by the shield his breast was left expos’d,
And slack’d his limbs in death; thund’ring he fell.
Next Thestor, son of Œnops, he assail’d;
He on his polish’d car, down-crouching, sat,
His mind by fear disorder’d; from his hands
The reins had dropp’d; him, thrusting with the spear,
Through the right cheek and through the teeth he smote,
Then dragg’d him, by the weapon, o’er the rail.
As when an angler on a prominent rock
Drags from the sea to shore with hook and line
A weighty fish; so him Patroclus dragg’d,
Gaping, from off the car; and dash’d him down
Upon his face; and life forsook his limbs.
Next Eryalus, eager for the fray,
On the mid forehead with a mighty stone
He struck; beneath the pond’rous helmet’s weight
The skull was split in twain; prostrate he fell,
By life-consuming death encompass’d round.
Forthwith Amphoterus, and Erymas,
Epaltes, Echius, and Tlepolemus,
Son of Damastor, Pyris, Ipheus brave,
Euippus, Polymelus, Argeas’ son,
In quick succession to the ground he brought.
Sarpedon his ungirdled forces saw
Promiscuous fall before Menoetius’ son,
And to the Lycians call’d in loud reproof:
“Shame, Lycians! whither fly ye? why this haste?
I will myself this chief confront, and learn
Who this may be of bearing proud and high,
Who on the Trojans grievous harm hath wrought,
And many a warrior’s limbs relax’d in death.”

He said, and from his car, accoutred, sprang;
Patroclus saw, and he too leap’d to earth.
As on a lofty rock, with angry screams,
Hook-beak’d, with talons curv’d, two vultures fight;
So with loud shouts these two to battle rush’d.
The son of Saturn pitying saw, and thus
To Juno spoke, his sister and his wife:

“Woe, woe! that fate decrees my best-belov’d,
Sarpedon, by Patroclus’ hand to fall;
E’en now conflicting thoughts my soul divide,
To bear him from the fatal strife unhurt,
And set him down on Lycia’s fertile plains,
Or leave him by Patroclus’ hand to fall.”

Whom, answer’d thus the stag-ey’d Queen of Heav’n:
“What words, dread son of Saturn, dost thou speak?
Wouldst thou a mortal man from death withdraw
Long since by fate decreed? Do what thou wilt;
Yet cannot we, the rest, applaud thine act.
This too I say, and turn it in thy mind:
If to his home Sarpedon thou restore
Alive, bethink thee, will not other Gods
Their sons too from the stubborn fight withdraw?
For in the field around the walls of Troy
Are many sons of Gods, in all of whom
This act of thine will angry feelings rouse.
But if thou love him, and thy soul deplore
His coming doom, yet in the stubborn fight
Leave him beneath Patroclus’ hand to fall:
Then, when his spirit hath fled, the charge assign
To Death and gentle Sleep, that in their arms
They bear him safe to Lycia’s wide-spread plains:
There shall his brethren and his friends perform
His fun’ral rites, and mound and column raise,
The fitting tribute to the mighty dead.”

Thus she; the Sire of Gods and men complied:
But to the ground some drops of blood let fall,
In honour of his son, whom fate decreed,
Far from his country, on the fertile plains
Of Troy to perish by Patroclus’ hand.
As near the champions drew, Patroclus first
His weapon hurl’d, and Thrasymedes brave,
The faithful follower of Sarpedon, struck
Below the waist, and slack’d his limbs in death.
Thrown in his turn, Sarpedon’s glitt’ring spear
Flew wide; and Pedasus, the gallant horse,
Through the right shoulder wounded; with a scream
He fell, and in the dust breath’d forth his life,
As, shrieking loud, his noble spirit fled.
This way and that his two companions swerv’d;
Creak’d the strong yoke, and tangled were the reins,
As in the dust the prostrate courser lay.
Automedon the means of safety saw;
And drawing from beside his brawny thigh
His keen-edg’d sword, with no uncertain blow
Cut loose the fallen horse; again set straight,
The two, extended, stretch’d the tightened rein.
Again in mortal strife the warriors clos’d:
Once more Sarpedon hurl’d his glitt’ring spear
In vain; above Patroclus’ shoulder flew
The point, innocuous; from his hand in turn
The spear not vainly thrown, Sarpedon struck
Where lies the diaphragm, below the heart.
He fell; as falls an oak, or poplar tall,
Or lofty pine, which on the mountain top
For some proud ship the woodman’s axe hath hewn:
So he, with death-cry sharp, before his car
Extended lay, and clutch’d the blood-stain’d soil.
As when a lion on the herd has sprung,
And, ’mid the heifers seiz’d, the lordly bull
Lies bellowing, crush’d between the lion’s jaws;
So by Patroclus slain, the Lycian chief,
Undaunted still, his faithful comrade call’d:
“Good Glaucus, warrior tried, behoves thee now
Thy spearmanship to prove, and warlike might.
Welcome the fray; put forth thine utmost speed;
Call on the Lycian chiefs, on ev’ry side,
To press around, and for Sarpedon fight;
Thou too thine arms for my protection wield;
For I to thee, through all thy future days,
Shall be a ceaseless scandal and reproach,
If me, thus slain before the Grecian ships,
The Greeks be suffer’d of my arms to spoil:
But stand thou fast, and others’ courage raise.”

Thus as he spoke, the shades of death o’erspread
His eyes and nostrils; then with foot firm-set
Upon his chest, Patroclus from the corpse
Drew, by main force, the fast-adhering spear;
The life forth issuing with the weapon’s point.
Loos’d from the royal car, the snorting steeds,
Eager for flight, the Myrmidons detain’d.
Deep-grieving, Glaucus heard his voice: and chafed
His spirit within him, that he lacked the power
To aid his comrade; with his hand he grasp’d
His wounded arm, in torture from the shaft
By Teucer shot, to save the Greeks from death,
As on he pressed to scale the lofty wall:
Then to Apollo thus address’d his pray’r:

“Hear me, great King, who, as on Lycia’s plains,
Art here in Troy; and hear’st in ev’ry place
Their voice who suffer, as I suffer now.
A grievous wound I bear, and sharpest pangs
My arm assail, nor may the blood he stanch’d:
The pain weighs down my shoulder; and my hand
Hath lost its pow’r to fight, or grasp my spear.
Sarpedon, bravest of the brave, is slain,
The son of Jove; yet Jove preserv’d him not.
But thou, O King, this grievous wound relieve;
Assuage the pain, and give me strength to urge
My Lycian comrades to maintain the war,
And fight myself to guard the noble dead.”

Thus as he pray’d, his pray’r Apollo heard,
Assuag’d his pains, and from the grievous wound
Stanch’ d the dark blood, and fill’d his soul with strength.
Glaucus within himself perceiv’d, and knew,
Rejoicing, that the God had heard his pray’r.
The Lycian leaders first on ev’ry side
He urg’d to hasten for their King to fight:
Then ’mid the Trojans went with lofty step,
And first to Panthous’ son, Polydamas,
To brave Agenor and Æneas next;
Then Hector of the brazen helm himself
Approaching, thus with winged words address’d:

“Hector, forgett’st thou quite thy brave allies,
Who freely in thy cause pour forth their lives,
Far from their home and friends? but they from thee
No aid receive; Sarpedon lies in death,
The leader of the buckler’d Lycian bands,
Whose justice and whose pow’r were Lycia’s shield;
Him by Patroclus’ hand hath Mars subdued.
But, friends, stand by me now! with just revenge
Inspir’d, determine that the Myrmidons
Shall not, how griev’d soe’er for all the Greeks
Who by our spears beside the ships have fall’n,
Our dead dishonour, and his arms obtain.”

He said; and through the Trojans thrill’d the sense
Of grief intolerable, unrestrain’d;
For he, though stranger-born, was of the State
A mighty pillar; and his followers
A num’rous host; and he himself in fight
Among the foremost; so, against the Greeks,
With fiery zeal they rush’d, by Hector led,
Griev’d for Sarpedon’s loss; on th’ other side
Patroclus’ manly heart the Greeks arous’d,
And to th’ Ajaces first, themselves inflamed
With warlike zeal, he thus address’d his speech:

“Ye sons of Ajax, now is come the time
Your former fame to rival, or surpass:
The man hath fall’n, who first o’erleap’d our wall,
Sarpedon; now remains, that, having slain,
We should his corpse dishonour, and his arms
Strip off; and should some comrade dare attempt
His rescue, him too with our spears subdue.”

He said; and they, with martial ardour fir’d,
Rush’d to the conflict. When on either side
The reinforc’d battalions were array’d,
Trojans and Lycians, Myrmidons and Greeks
Around the dead in sternest combat met,
With fearful shouts; and loud their armour rang.
Then, to enhance the horror of the strife
Around his son, with darkness Jove o’erspread
The stubborn fight: the Trojans first drove back
The keen-ey’d Greeks; for first a warrior fell,
Not of the meanest ’mid the Myrmidons,
Epegeus, son of valiant Agacles;
Who in Budaeum’s thriving state bore rule
Erewhile; but flying for a kinsman slain,
To Peleus and the silver-footed Queen
He came a suppliant; with Achilles thence
To Ilium sent, to join the war of Troy.
Him, as he stretch’d his hand to seize the dead,
Full on the forehead with a massive stone
Great Hector smote; within the pond’rous helm
The skull was split in twain; prone on the corpse
He fell, by life-destroying death subdued.
Griev’d was Patroclus for his comrade slain;
Forward he darted, as a swift-wing’d hawk,
That swoops amid the starlings and the daws;
So swift didst thou, Patroclus, car-borne chief,
Upon the Trojans and the Lycians spring,
Thy soul with anger for thy comrade fill’d.
A pond’rous stone he hurl’d at Sthenelas,
Son of Ithaemenes; the mighty mass
Fell on his neck, and all the muscles crush’d.
Back drew great Hector and the chiefs of Troy;
Far as a jav’lin’s flight, in sportive strife,
Or in the deadly battle, hurl’d by one
His utmost strength exerting; back so far
The Trojans drew, so far the Greeks pursued.
Glaucus, the leader of the Lycian spears,
First turning, slew the mighty Bathycles,
The son of Chalcon; he in Hellas dwelt,
In wealth surpassing all the Myrmidons.
Him, as he gain’d upon him in pursuit,
Quick turning, Glaucus through the breast transfix’d;
Thund’ring he fell; deep grief possess’d the Greeks
At loss of one so valiant; fiercely joy’d
The Trojans, and around him crowded thick;
Nor of their wonted valour were the Greeks
Oblivious, but still onward held their course.
Then slew Meriones a crested chief,
The bold Laogonus, Onetor’s son;
Onetor, of Idaean Jove the priest,
And by the people as a God rever’d.
Below the ear he struck him; from his limbs
The spirit fled, and darkness veil’d his eyes.

Then at Meriones Æneas threw
His brazen spear, in hopes beneath his shield
To find a spot unguarded; he beheld,
And downward stooping, shunn’d the brazen death;
Behind him far, deep in the soil infix’d,
The weapon stood; there Mars its impulse stay’d;
So, bootless hurl’d, though by no feeble hand,
Æneas’ spear stood quiv’ring in the ground;
Then thus in wrath he cried: “Meriones,
Had it but struck thee, nimble as thou art,
My spear had brought thy dancing to a close.”

To whom the spearman skill’d, Meriones:
“Brave as thou art, Æneas, ’tis too much
For thee to hope the might of all to quell,
Who dare confront thee; thou art mortal too!
And if my aim be true, and should my spear
But strike thee fair, all valiant as thou art,
And confident, yet me thy fall shall crown
With triumph, and thy soul to Hades send.”

He said; and him Menoetius’ noble son
Address’d with grave rebuke: “Meriones,
Brave warrior, why thus waste the time in words?
Trust me, good friend, ’tis not by vaunting speech,
Unseconded by deeds, that we may hope
To scare away the Trojans from the slain:
Hands are for battle, words for council meet;
Boots it not now to wrangle, but to fight.”

He said, and led the way; him follow’d straight
The godlike chief; forthwith, as loudly rings,
Amid the mountain forest’s deep recess,
The woodman’s axe, and far is heard the sound;
So from the wide-spread earth their clamour rose,
As brazen arms, and shields, and tough bull’s-hide
Encounter’d swords and double-pointed spears.
Nor might the sharpest sight Sarpedon know,
From head to foot with wounds and blood and dust
Disfigur’d; thickly round the dead they swarm’d.
As when at spring-tide in the cattle-sheds
Around the milk-cans swarm the buzzing flies,
While the warm milk is frothing in the pail;
So swarm’d they round the dead; nor Jove the while
Turn’d from the stubborn fight his piercing glance;
But still look’d down with gaze intent, and mus’d
Upon Patroclus’ coming fate, in doubt,
If he too there beside Sarpedon slain,
Should perish by illustrious Hector’s hand,
Spoil’d of his arms; or yet be spared awhile
To swell the labours of the battle-field.
He judg’d it best at length, that once again
The gallant follower of Peleus’ son
Should tow’rd the town with fearful slaughter drive
The Trojans, and their brazen-helmed chief.
First Hector’s soul with panic fear he fill’d;
Mounting his car, he fled, and urg’d to flight
The Trojans; for he saw the scales of Jove.
Then nor the valiant Lycians held their ground;
All fled in terror, as they saw their King
Pierc’d through the heart, amid a pile of dead;
For o’er his body many a warrior fell,
When Saturn’s son the conflict fierce inflam’d.
Then from Sarpedon’s breast they stripp’d his arms,
Of brass refulgent; these Menoetius’ son
Sent by his comrades to the ships of Greece.

To Phoebus then the Cloud-compeller thus:
“Hie thee, good Phoebus, from amid the spears
Withdraw Sarpedon, and from all his wounds
Cleanse the dark gore; then bear him far away,
And lave his body in the flowing stream;
Then with divine ambrosia all his limbs
Anointing, clothe him in immortal robes.
To two swift bearers give him then in charge,
To Sleep and Death, twin brothers, in their arms
To bear him safe to Lycia’s wide-spread plains:
There shall his brethren and his friends perform
His fun’ral rites, and mound and column raise,
The fitting tribute to the mighty dead.”

He said; obedient to his father’s words,
Down to the battle-field Apollo sped
From Ida’s height; and from amid the spears
Withdrawn, he bore Sarpedon far away,
And lav’d his body in the flowing stream;
Then with divine ambrosia all his limbs
Anointing, cloth’d him in immortal robes;
To two swift bearers gave him then in charge,
To Sleep and Death, twin brothers; in their arms
They bore him safe to Lycia’s wide-spread plains.

Then to Automedon Patroclus gave
His orders, and the flying foe pursued.
Oh much deceiv’d, insensate! had he now
But borne in mind the words of Peleus’ son,
He might have ’scap’d the bitter doom of death.
But still Jove’s will the will of man o’errules:
Who strikes with panic, and of vict’ry robs
The bravest; and anon excites to war;
Who now Patroclus’ breast with fury fill’d.
Whom then, Patroclus, first, whom slew’st thou last,
When summon’d by the Gods to meet thy doom?
Adrastus, and Autonous, Perimus
The son of Meges, and Echeclus next;
Epistor, Melanippus, Elasus,
And Mulius, and Pylartes; these he slew;
The others all in flight their safety found.

Then had the Greeks the lofty-gated town
Of Priam captur’d by Patroclus’ hand,
So forward and so fierce he bore his spear;
But on the well-built tow’r Apollo stood,
On his destruction bent, and Troy’s defence
The jutting angle of the lofty wall
Patroclus thrice assail’d; his onset thrice
Apollo, with his own immortal hands
Repelling, backward thrust his glitt’ring shield.
But when again, with more than mortal force
He made his fourth attempt, with awful mien
And threat’ning voice the Far-destroyer spoke:

“Back, Heav’n-born chief, Patroclus! not to thee
Hath fate decreed the triumph to destroy
The warlike Trojans’ city; no, nor yet
To great Achilles, mightier far than thou.”

Thus as he spoke, Patroclus backward stepp’d,
Shrinking before the Far-destroyer’s wrath.
Still Hector kept before the Scaean gates
His coursers; doubtful, if again to dare
The battle-throng, or summon all the host
To seek the friendly shelter of the wall.
Thus as he mus’d, beside him Phoebus stood,
In likeness of a warrior stout and brave,
Brother of Hecuba, the uncle thence
Of noble Hector, Asius, Dymas’ son;
Who dwelt in Phrygia, by Saugarius’ stream;
His form assuming, thus Apollo spoke:
“Hector, why shrink’st thou from the battle thus?
It ill beseems thee! Would to Heav’n that I
So far thy greater were, as thou art mine;
Then sorely shouldst thou rue this abstinence.
But, forward thou! against Patroclus urge
Thy fiery steeds, so haply by his death
Apollo thee with endless fame may crown.”

This said, the God rejoin’d the strife of men;
And noble Hector bade Cebriones
Drive ’mid the fight his car; before him mov’d
Apollo, scatt’ring terror ’mid the Greeks,
And lustre adding to the arms of Troy.
All others Hector pass’d unnotic’d by,
Nor stay’d to slay; Patroclus was the mark
At which his coursers’ clatt’ring hoofs he drove.
On th’ other side, Patroclus from his car
Leap’d to the ground: his left hand held his spear;
And in the right a pond’rous mass he bore
Of rugged stone, that fill’d his ample grasp:
The stone he hurl’d; not far it miss’d its mark,
Nor bootless flew; but Hector’s charioteer
It struck, Cebriones, a bastard son
Of royal Priam, as the reins he held.
Full on his temples fell the jagged mass,
Drove both his eyebrows in, and crush’d the bone;
Before him in the dust his eyeballs fell;
And, like a diver, from the well-wrought car
Headlong he plung’d; and life forsook his limbs.
O’er whom Patroclus thus with bitter jest:
“Heav’n! what agility! how deftly thrown
That somersault! if only in the sea
Such feats he wrought, with him might few compete,
Diving for oysters, if with such a plunge
He left his boat, how rough soe’er the waves,
As from his car he plunges to the ground:
Troy can, it seems, accomplish’d tumblers boast.”

Thus saying, on Cebriones he sprang,
As springs a lion, through the breast transfix’d,
In act the sheepfold to despoil, and dies
The victim of his courage; so didst thou
Upon Cebriones, Patroclus, spring.
Down from his car too Hector leap’d to earth.
So, o’er Cebriones, oppos’d they stood;
As on the mountain, o’er a slaughter’d stag,
Both hunger-pinch’d, two lions fiercely fight,
So o’er Cebriones two mighty chiefs,
Menoetius’ son and noble Hector, strove,
Each in the other bent to plunge his spear.
The head, with grasp unyielding, Hector held;
Patroclus seiz’d the foot; and, crowding round,
Trojans and Greeks in stubborn conflict clos’d.

As when, encount’ring in some mountain-glen,
Eurus and Notus shake the forest deep,
Of oak, or ash, or slender cornel-tree,
Whose tap’ring branches are together thrown,
With fearful din, and crash of broken boughs;
So mix’d confus’dly, Greeks and Trojans fought,
No thought of flight by either entertain’d.
Thick o’er Cebriones the jav’lins flew,
And feather’d arrows, bounding from the string;
And pond’rous stones that on the bucklers rang,
As round the dead they fought; amid the dust
That eddying rose, his art forgotten all,
A mighty warrior, mightily he lay.
While in mid Heav’n the sun pursued his course,
Thick flew the shafts, and fast the people fell
On either side; but when declining day
Brought on the hour that sees the loosen’d steers,
The Greeks were stronger far; and from the darts
And Trojan battle-cry Cebriones
They drew, and from his breast his armour stripp’d.
Fiercely Patroclus on the Trojans fell:
Thrice he assail’d them, terrible as Mars,
With fearful shouts; and thrice nine foes he slew:
But when again, with more than mortal force
His fourth assault he made, thy term of life,
Patroclus, then approach’d its final close;
For Phoebus’ awful self encounter’d thee,
Amid the battle-throng, of thee unseen,
For thickest darkness shrouded all his form:
He stood behind, and with extended palm
Dealt on Patroclus’ neck and shoulders broad
A mighty buffet; dizzy swam his eyes,
And from his head Apollo snatch’d the helm;
Clank’d, as it roll’d beneath the horses’ feet,
The visor’d helm; the horsehair plume with blood
And dust polluted; never till that day
Was that proud helmet so with dust defil’d,
That wont to deck a godlike chief, and guard
Achilles’ noble head, and graceful brow:
Now by the will of Jove to Hector giv’n.
Now death was near at hand; and in his grasp
His spear was shiver’d, pond’rous, long, and tough,
Brass-pointed; with its belt, the ample shield
Fell from his shoulders; and Apollo’s hand,
The royal son of Jove, his corslet loos’d.
Then was his mind bewilder’d; and his limbs
Gave way beneath him; all aghast he stood:
Him, from behind, a Dardan, Panthous’ son,
Euphorbus, peerless ’mid the Trojan youth,
To hurl the spear, to run, to drive the car,
Approaching close, between the shoulders stabb’d;
He, train’d to warfare, from his car, ere this
A score of Greeks had from their chariots hurl’d:
Such was the man who thee, Patroclus, first
Wounded, but not subdued; the ashen spear
He, in all haste, withdrew; nor dar’d confront
Patroclus, though disarm’d, in deadly strife.

Back to his comrades’ shelt’ring ranks retir’d,
From certain death, Patroclus: by the stroke
Of Phoebus vanquish’d, and Euphorbus’ spear:
But Hector, when Patroclus from the fight
He saw retreating, wounded, through the ranks
Advancing, smote him through the flank; right through
The brazen spear was driv’n; thund’ring he fell;
And deeply mourn’d his fall the Grecian host.

As when a lion hath in fight o’erborne
A tusked boar, when on the mountain top
They two have met, in all their pride of strength,
Both parch’d with thirst, around a scanty spring;
And vanquish’d by the lion’s force, the boar
Hath yielded, gasping; so Menoetius’ son,
Great deeds achiev’d, at length beneath the spear
Of noble Hector yielded up his life;
Who o’er the vanquish’d, thus exulting, spoke:
“Patroclus, but of late thou mad’st thy boast
To raze our city walls, and in your ships
To bear away to your far-distant land,
Their days of freedom lost, our Trojan dames:
Fool that thou wast! nor knew’st, in their defence,
That Hector’s flying coursers scour’d the plain;
From them, the bravest of the Trojans, I
Avert the day of doom; while on our shores
Thy flesh shall glut the carrion birds of Troy.
Poor wretch! though brave he be, yet Peleus’ son
Avail’d thee nought, when, hanging back himself,
With sage advice he sent thee forth to fight:
‘Come not to me, Patroclus, car-borne chief,
Nor to the ships return, until thou bear
The warrior-slayer Hector’s bloody spoils,
Torn from his body;’ such were, I suppose,
His counsels; thou, poor fool, becam’st his dupe.”
To whom Patroclus thus in accents faint:

“Hector, thou boastest loudly now, that Jove,
With Phoebus join’d, hath thee with vict’ry crown’d:
They wrought my death, who stripp’d me of my arms.
Had I to deal with twenty such as thee,
They all should perish, vanquish’d by my spear:
Me fate hath slain, and Phoebus; and, of men,
Euphorbus; thou wast but the third to strike.
This too I say, and bear it in thy mind;
Not long shalt thou survive me; death e’en now
And final doom hangs o’er thee, by the hand
Of great Achilles, Peleus’ matchless son.”

Thus as he spoke, the gloom of death his eyes
O’erspread, and to the shades his spirit fled,
Mourning his fate, his youth and strength cut off.
To whom, though dead, the noble Hector thus:
“Patroclus, why predict my coming fate?
Or who can say but fair-hair’d Thetis’ son,
Achilles, by my spear may first be slain?”

He said, and planting firm his foot, withdrew
The brazen spear, and backward drove the dead
From off the weapon’s point; then, spear in hand,
Intent to slay, Automedon pursued,
The godlike follower of Æacides:
But him in safety bore th’ immortal steeds,
The noble prize the Gods to Peleus gave.





Nor was Patroclus’ fall, by Trojans slain,
Of warlike Menelaus unobserv’d;
Forward he sprang, in dazzling arms array’d,
And round him mov’d, as round her new-dropp’d calf
Her first, a heifer moves with plaintive moan:
So round Patroclus Menelaus mov’d,
His shield’s broad orb and spear before him held,
To all who might oppose him threat’ning death.
Nor, on his side, was Panthous’ noble son
Unmindful of the slain; but, standing near,
The warlike Menelaus thus address’d:

“Illustrious son of Atreus, Heav’n-born chief,
Quit thou the dead; yield up the bloody spoils:
For, of the Trojans and their fam’d Allies,
Mine was the hand that in the stubborn fight
First struck Patroclus; leave me then to wear
Among the men of Troy my honours due,
Lest by my spear thou lose thy cherish’d life.”

To whom in anger Menelaus thus:
“O Father Jove, how ill this vaunting tone
Beseems this braggart! In their own esteem,
“With Panthous’ sons for courage none may vie;
Nor pard, nor lion, nor the forest boar,
Fiercest of beasts, and proudest of his strength.
Yet nought avail’d to Hyperenor’s might
His youthful vigour, when he held me cheap,
And my encounter dar’d; of all the Greeks
He deem’d my prowess least; yet he, I ween,
On his own feet return’d not, to rejoice
His tender wife’s and honour’d parents’ sight.
So shall thy pride be quell’d, if me thou dare
Encounter; but I warn thee, while ’tis time,
Ere ill betide thee, ’mid the gen’ral throng
That thou withdraw, nor stand to me oppos’d.
After th’ event may e’en a fool be wise.”
He spoke in vain; Euphorbus thus replied:

“Now, Heav’n-born Menelaus, shalt thou pay
The forfeit for my brother’s life, o’er whom,
Slain by thy hand, thou mak’st thy boasting speech.
Thou in the chambers of her new-found home
Hast made his bride a weeping widow; thou
Hast fill’d with bitt’rest grief his parents’ hearts:
Some solace might those hapless mourners find,
Could I thy head and armour in the hands
Of Panthous and of honour’d Phrontis place;
Nor uncontested shall the proof remain,
Nor long deferr’d, of vict’ry or defeat.”

He said, and struck the centre of the shield,
But broke not through; against the stubborn brass
The point was bent; then with a pray’r to Jove
The son of Atreus in his turn advanc’d;
And, backward as he stepp’d, below his throat
Took aim, and pressing hard with stalwart hand
Drove through the yielding neck the pond’rous spear:
Thund’ring he fell, and loud his armour rang.
Those locks, that with the Graces’ hair might vie,
Those tresses bright, with gold and silver bound,
Were dabbled all with blood. As when a man
Hath rear’d a fair and vig’rous olive plant,
In some lone spot, by copious-gushing springs,
And seen expanding, nurs’d by ev’ry breeze,
Its whit’ning blossoms; till with sudden gust
A sweeping hurricane of wind and rain
Uproots it from its bed, and prostrate lays;
So lay the youthful son of Panthous, slain
By Atreus’ son, and of his arms despoil’d.
And as a lion, in the mountains bred,
In pride of strength, amid the pasturing herd
Seizes a heifer in his pow’rful jaws,
The choicest; and, her neck first broken, rends,
And, on her entrails gorging, laps the blood;
Though with loud clamour dogs and herdsmen round
Assail him from afar, yet ventures none
To meet his rage, for fear is on them all;
So none was there so bold, with dauntless breast
The noble Menelaus’ wrath to meet.
Now had Atrides borne away with ease
The spoils of Panthous’ son; but Phoebus grudg’d
His prize of vict’ry, and against him launch’d
The might of Hector, terrible as Mars:
To whom his winged words, in Mentes’ form,
Chief of the Cicones, he thus address’d:

“Hector, thy labour all is vain, pursuing
Pelides’ flying steeds; and hard are they
For mortal man to harness, or control.
Save for Achilles’ self, the Goddess-born.
The valiant Menelaus, Atreus’ son,
Defends meanwhile Patroclus; and e’en now
Hath slain a noble Trojan, Panthous’ son,
Euphorbus, and his youthful vigour quell’d.”

He said, and join’d again the strife of men:
Hector’s dark soul with bitter grief was fill’d;
He look’d amid the ranks, and saw the two,
One slain, the other stripping off his arms,
The blood outpouring from the gaping wound.
Forward he sprang, in dazzling arms array’d,
Loud shouting, blazing like the quenchless flames
Of Vulcan: Menelaus heard the shout,
And, troubled, commun’d with his valiant heart:

“Oh, woe is me! for should I now the spoils
Abandon, and Patroclus, who for me
And in my cause lies slain, of any Greek
Who saw me, I might well incur the blame:
And yet if here alone I dare to fight
With Hector and his Trojans, much I fear,
Singly, to be by numbers overwhelm’d;
For Hector all the Trojans hither brings.
But wherefore entertain such thoughts, my soul?
Who strives, against the will divine, with one
Belov’d of Heav’n, a bitter doom must meet.
Then none may blame me, though I should retreat
From Hector, who with Heav’n’s assistance wars.
Yet could I hear brave Ajax’ battle cry,
We two, returning, would the encounter dare,
E’en against Heav’n, if so for Peleus’ son
We might regain, and bear away the dead:
Some solace of our loss might then be ours.”

While in his mind and spirit thus he mus’d,
By Hector led, the Trojan ranks advanc’d:
Backward he mov’d, abandoning the dead;
But turning oft, as when by men and dogs
A bearded lion from the fold is driv’n
With shouts and spears; yet grieves his mighty heart,
And with reluctant step he quits the yard:
So from Patroclus Menelaus mov’d;
Yet when he reach’d his comrades’ ranks, he turn’d,
And look’d around, if haply he might find
The mighty Ajax, son of Telamon.
Him on the battle’s farthest left he spied,
Cheering his friends and urging to the fight,
For sorely Phoebus had their courage tried;
And hast’ning to his side, address’d him thus:

“Ajax, haste hither; to the rescue come
Of slain Patroclus; if perchance we two
May to Achilles, Peleus’ son, restore
His body: his naked body, for his arms
Are prize to Hector of the glancing helm.”

He said, and Ajax’ spirit within him stirr’d;
Forward he sprang, and with him Atreus’ son.
Hector was dragging now Patroclus’ corpse,
Stripped of its glitt’ring armour, and intent
The head to sever with his sword, and give
The mangled carcase to the dogs of Troy:
But Ajax, with his tow’r-like shield, approach’d;
Then Hector to his comrades’ ranks withdrew,
Rush’d to his car, and bade the Trojans bear
The glitt’ring arms, his glorious prize, to Troy:
While Ajax with his mighty shield o’erspread
Menoetius’ son; and stood, as for his cubs
A lion stands, whom hunters, unaware,
Have with his offspring met amid the woods.
Proud in his strength he stands; and down are drawn,
Cov’ring his eyes, the wrinkles of his brow:
So o’er Patroclus mighty Ajax stood,
And by his side, his heart with grief oppress’d,
The warlike Menelaus, Atreus’ son.

Then Glaucus, leader of the Lycian host,
To Hector thus, with scornful glance, address’d
His keen reproaches: “Hector, fair of form,
How art thou wanting in the fight! thy fame,
Coward and runaway, thou hast belied.
Bethink thee now, if thou alone canst save
The city, aided but by Trojans born;
Henceforth no Lycian will go forth for Troy
To fight with Greeks; since favour none we gain
By unremitting toil against the foe.
How can a meaner man expect thine aid,
Who basely to the Greeks a prize and spoil
Sarpedon leav’st, thy comrade and thy guest?
Greatly he serv’d the city and thyself,
While yet he liv’d; and now thou dar’st not save
His body from the dogs! By my advice
If Lycians will be rul’d, we take at once
Our homeward way, and Troy may meet her doom.
But if in Trojan bosoms there abode
The daring, dauntless courage, meet for men
Who in their country’s cause against the foe
Endure both toil and war, we soon should see
Patroclus brought within the walls of Troy;
Him from the battle could we bear away,
And, lifeless, bring to royal Priam’s town,
Soon would the Greeks Sarpedon’s arms release,
And we to Ilium’s heights himself might bear:
For with his valiant comrades there lies slain
The follower of the bravest chief of Greece.
But thou before the mighty Ajax stood’st
With downcast eyes, nor durst in manly fight
Contend with one thy better far confess’d.”

To whom thus Hector of the glancing helm,
With stern regard, replied: “Why, Glaucus, speak,
Brave as thou art, in this o’erbearing strain?
Good friend, I heretofore have held thee wise
O’er all who dwell in Lycia’s fertile soil;
But now I change, and hold thy judgment cheap,
Who chargest me with flying from the might
Of giant Ajax; never have I shrunk
From the stern fight, and clatter of the cars;
But all o’erruling is the mind of Jove,
Who strikes with panic, and of vict’ry robs
The bravest; and anon excites to war.
Stand by me now, and see if through the day
I prove myself the coward that thou say’st,
Or suffer that a Greek, how brave soe’er,
Shall rescue from my hands Patroclus’ corpse.”

He said, and loudly on the Trojans call’d:
“Trojans and Lycians, and ye Dardans, fam’d
In close encounter, quit ye now like men;
Maintain awhile the stubborn fight, while I
The splendid armour of Achilles don,
My glorious prize from slain Patroclus torn.”

So saying, Hector of the glancing helm,
Withdrawing from the field, with rapid steps
His comrades follow’d, and ere long o’ertook,
Who tow’rd the town Achilles’ armour bore;
Then standing from the bloody fight aloof
The armour he exchang’d; his own he bade
The warlike Trojans to the city bear;
While he, of Peleus’ son, Achilles, donn’d
The heav’nly armour, which th’ immortal Gods
Gave to his sire; he to his son convey’d;
Yet in that armour grew not old that son.

Him when apart the Cloud-compeller saw
Girt with the arms of Peleus’ godlike son,
He shook his head, and inly thus he mus’d:
“Ah hapless! little deem’st thou of thy fate,
Though now so nigh! Thou of the prime of men,
The dread of all, hast donn’d th’ immortal arms,
Whose comrade, brave and good, thy hand hath slain;
And sham’d him, stripping from his head and breast
Helmet and cuirass; yet thy latest hours
Will I with glory crown; since ne’er from thee,
Return’d from battle, shall Andromache
Receive the spoils of Peleus’ godlike son.”

He said, and nodded with his shadowy brows;
Then with the armour, fitted to his form
By Jove himself, was Hector girt by Mars
The fierce and terrible; with vig’rous strength
His limbs were strung, as ’mid his brave allies
He sprang, loud-shouting; glitt’ring in his arms,
To all he seem’d Achilles’ godlike self.
To each and all in cheering tones he spoke,
Mesthles and Glaucus and Thersilochus,
Asteropaeus and Hippothous,
Medon, Deisenor, Phoreys, Chromius,
And Ennomus the seer: to all of these
His winged words he cheeringly address’d:

“Hear me, ye countless tribes, that dwelling round
Assist our cause! You from your sev’ral homes
Not for display of numbers have I call’d,
But that with willing hearts ye should defend
Our wives and infants from the warlike Greeks:
For this I drain my people’s stores, for food
And gifts for you, exalting your estate;
Then, who will boldly onward, he may fall,
Or safe escape, such is the chance of war;
But who within our valiant Trojans’ ranks
Shall but the body of Patroclus bring,
Despite the might of Ajax; half the spoils
To him I give, the other half myself
Retaining; and his praise shall equal mine.”

He said; and onward, with uplifted spears,
They march’d upon the Greeks; high rose their hopes
From Ajax Telamon to snatch the dead;
Vain hopes, which cost them many a life! Then thus
To valiant Menelaus Ajax spoke;

“O Heav’n-born Menelaus, noble friend,
For safe return I dare no longer hope:
Not for Patroclus’ corpse so much I fear,
Which soon will glut the dogs and birds of Troy,
As for my life and thine I tremble now:
For, like a war-cloud, Hector’s might I see
O’ershadowing all around; now is our doom
Apparent; but do thou for succour call
On all the chiefs, if haply they may hear.”
Thus Ajax spoke: obedient to his word,
On all the chiefs Atrides call’d aloud:

“O friends, the chiefs and councillors of Greece,
All ye that banquet at the gen’ral cost
With Atreus’ sons, and o’er your sev’ral states
Dominion hold; whose honour is of Jove;
’Twere hard to call by name each single man,
So fierce the combat rages; but let each
And all their aid afford, and deem, it shame
Patroclus’ corpse should glut the dogs of Troy.”

He said: first heard Oileus’ active son,
And hast’ning through the fray, beside him stood.
Next him Idomeneus, with whom there came,
Valiant as Mars, his friend Meriones.
But who can know or tell the names of all,
Who, following, swell’d the battle of the Greeks?
Onward the Trojans press’d, by Hector led:
With such a sound, as when the ocean wave
Meets on the beach th’ outpouring of a stream,
Swoll’n by the rains of Heav’n: the lofty cliffs
Resound, and bellows the big sea without;
With such a sound advanc’d the Trojan host:
While round Patroclus, with one heart and mind,
The Greeks a fence of brass-clad bucklers rais’d.
O’er their bright helms the son of Saturn shed
A veil of darkness; for Menoetius’ son,
Achilles’ faithful friend, while yet he liv’d
Jove hated not, nor would that now his corpse
Should to the dogs of Troy remain a prey,
But to the rescue all his comrades stirr’d.
At first the Trojans drove the keen-ey’d Greeks;
Leaving the corpse, they fled; nor with their spears
The valiant Trojans reach’d a single Greek;
But on the dead they seiz’d; yet not for long
Endur’d their flight; them Ajax rallied soon,
In form pre-eminent, and deeds of arms,
O’er all the Greeks, save Peleus’ matchless son.
Onward he sprang, as springs a mountain boar,
Which, turning in the forest glade to bay,
Scatters with ease both dogs and stalwart youths;
So Ajax scatter’d soon the Trojan ranks,
That round Patroclus closing, hop’d to bear,
With glory to themselves, his corpse to Troy.
Hippothous, Pelasgian Lethus’ son,
Was dragging by the feet the noble dead,
A leathern belt around his ancles bound,
Seeking the favour of the men of Troy;
But on himself he brought destruction down,
Which none might turn aside; for from the crowd
Outsprang the son of Telamon, and struck,
In close encounter, on the brass-cheek’d helm;
The plumed helm was shiver’d by the blow,
Dealt by a weighty spear and stalwart hand;
Gush’d from the wound the mingled blood and brain,
His vital spirit quench’d; and on the ground
Fell from his pow’rless grasp Patroclus’ foot;
While he himself lay stretch’d beside the dead,
Far from his own Larissa’s teeming soil:
Not destin’d he his parents to repay
Their early care; for short his term of life,
By godlike Ajax’ mighty spear subdu’d.

At Ajax Hector threw his glitt’ring spear:
He saw, and narrowly the brazen death
Escap’d; but Schedius, son of Iphitus,
(The bravest of the Phocian chiefs, who dwelt
In far-fam’d Panopeus, the mighty Lord
Of num’rous hosts,) below the collar-bone
It struck, and passing through, the brazen point
Came forth again beneath his shoulder-blade:
Thund’ring he fell, and loud his armour rang.

As Phorcys, son of Phaenops, kept his watch
O’er slain Hippothous, him Ajax smote
Below the waist; the weighty spear broke through
The hollow breastplate, and th’ intestines tore;
Prone in the dust he fell, and clutch’d the ground.
At this the Trojan chiefs and Hector’s self
’Gan to give way; the Greeks, with joyful shouts,
Seiz’d both the dead, and stripp’d their armour off.
To Ilium now, before the warlike Greeks,
O’ercome by panic, had the Trojans fled;
And now had Greeks, despite the will of Jove,
By their own strength and courage, won the day,
Had not Apollo’s self Æneas rous’d,
In likeness of a herald, Periphas,
The son of Epytus, now aged grown
In service of Æneas’ aged sire,
A man of kindliest soul: his form assum’d
Apollo, and Æneas thus address’d:

“Æneas, how, against the will of Heav’n,
Could ye defend your city, as others now
In their own strength and courage confident,
Their numbers, and their troops’ undaunted hearts,
I see their cause maintaining; if when Jove
Rather to us than them the vict’ry wills,
With fear unspeakable ye shun the fight?”

He said: the presence of the Archer-God
Æneas knew, and loud to Hector call’d:
“Hector, and all ye other chiefs of Troy,
And brave Allies, foul shame it were that we,
O’ercome by panic, should to Ilium now
In flight be driv’n before the warlike Greeks;
And by my side, but now, some God there stood,
And told how Jove, the sov’reign arbiter
Of battle, on our side bestow’d his aid;
On then! nor undisturbed allow the Greeks
To bear Patroclus’ body to their ships.”

He said, and far before the ranks advanc’d;
They rallying turn’d, and fac’d again the Greeks.
Then first Æneas’ spear the comrade brave
Of Lycomedes struck, Laocritus,
Son of Arisbas; Lycomedes saw
With pitying eyes his gallant comrade’s fall;
And standing near, his glitt’ring spear he threw,
And through the midriff Apisaon struck,
His people’s guardian chief, the valiant son
Of Hippasus, and slack’d his limbs in death.
He from Paeonia’s fertile fields had come,
O’er all his comrades eminent in fight,
All save Asteropaeus, who with eyes
Of pity saw his gallant comrade’s fall,
And forward sprang to battle with the Greeks;
Yet could not force his way; for all around
Patroclus rose a fence of serried shields,
And spears projecting: such the orders giv’n
By Ajax, and with earnest care enforc’d;
That from around the dead should none retire,
Nor any to the front advance alone
Before his fellows; but their steady guard
Maintain, and hand to hand the battle wage.
So order’d Ajax; then with crimson blood
The earth was wet; and hand to hand they fell,
Trojans alike, and brave Allies, and Greeks;
For neither these a bloodless fight sustain’d,
Though fewer far their losses; for they stood
Of mutual succour mindful, and support.
Thus, furious as the rage of fire, they fought;
Nor might ye deem the glorious sun himself
Nor moon was safe; for darkest clouds of night
O’erspread the warriors, who the battle wag’d
Around the body of Menoetius’ son:
Elsewhere the Trojans and the well-greav’d Greeks
Fought, undisturb’d, in the clear light of day;
The sun’s bright beams were shed abroad; no cloud
Lay on the face of earth or mountain tops;
They but by fits, at distant intervals,
And far apart, each seeking to avoid
The hostile missiles, fought; but in the midst
The bravest all, in darkness and in strife
Sore press’d, toil’d on beneath their armour’s weight.

As yet no tidings of Patroclus’ fall
Had reach’d two valiant chiefs, Antilochus
And Thrasymedes; but they deem’d him still
Alive, and fighting in the foremost ranks.
They, witnessing their comrades’ flight and death,
Fought on apart, by Nestor so enjoin’d,
When from the ships he bade them join the fray.
Great was meanwhile their labour, who sustain’d,
Throughout the livelong day, that weary fight;
Reek’d with continuous toil and sweat, the knees,
And legs and feet, the arms, and eyes, of all
Who round Achilles’ faithful comrade fought.
As when a chief his people bids to stretch
A huge bull’s hide, all drench’d and soak’d with grease;
They in a circle rang’d, this way and that,
Pull the tough hide, till ent’ring in, the grease
Is all absorb’d; and dragg’d by num’rous hands
The supple skin to th’ utmost length is stretch’d;
So these in narrow space this way and that
The body dragg’d; and high the hopes of each
To bear it off in triumph; to their ships
The Greeks, to Troy the Trojans; fiercely rag’d
The struggle; spirit-stirring Mars himself,
Or Pallas to her utmost fury rous’d,
Had not that struggle with contempt beheld:
Such grievous labour o’er Patroclus’ corpse
Had Jove to horses and to men decreed.

But of Patroclus’ fall no tidings yet
Had reach’d Achilles; for the war was wag’d
Far from the ships, beneath the walls of Troy;
Nor look’d he of his death to hear, but deem’d
That when the Trojans to their gates were driv’n,
He would return in safety; for no hope
Had he of taking by assault the town,
With, or without, his aid; for oft apart
His Goddess-mother had his doom, foretold,
Revealing to her son the mind of Jove;
Yet ne’er had warn’d him of such grief as this,
Which now befell, his dearest comrade’s loss.

Still round the dead they held their pointed spears,
Fought hand to hand, and mutual slaughter dealt;
And thus perchance some brass-clad Greek would say:

“O friends, ’twere shameful should we to the ships
Ingloriously return; ere that should be,
Let earth engulph us all; so better far
Than let these Trojans to their city bear
Our dead, and boast them of their triumph gain’d.”
On th’ other hand some valiant Trojan thus
Would shout: “O friends, tho’ fate decreed that here
We all should die, yet let not one give way.”

Thus, cheering each his comrades, would they speak,
And thus they fought; the iron clangour pierc’d
The empty air, and brazen vault of Heav’n.
But, from the fight withdrawn, Achilles’ steeds
Wept, as they heard how in the dust was laid
Their charioteer, by Hector’s murd’rous hand.
Automedon, Diores’ valiant son,
Essay’d in vain to rouse them with the lash,
In vain with honey’d words, in vain with threats;
Nor to the ships would they return again
By the broad Hellespont, nor join the fray;
But as a column stands, which marks the tomb
Of man or woman, so immovable
Beneath the splendid car they stood, their heads
Down-drooping to the ground, while scalding tears
Dropp’d earthward from their eyelids, as they mourn’d
Their charioteer; and o’er the yoke-band shed
Down stream’d their ample manes, with dust defil’d.
The son of Saturn pitying saw their grief,
And sorrowing shook his head, as thus he mus’d:

“Ah, hapless horses! wherefore gave we you
To royal Peleus, to a mortal man,
You that from age and death are both exempt!
Was it that you the miseries might share
Of wretched mortals? for of all that breathe,
And walk upon the earth, or creep, is nought
More wretched than th’ unhappy race of man.
Yet shall not ye, nor shall your well-wrought car,
By Hector, son of Priam, be controll’d;
I will not suffer it; enough for him
To hold, with vaunting boast, Achilles’ arms;
But to your limbs and spirits will I impart
Such strength, that from the battle to the ships
Ye shall in safety bear Automedon;
For yet I will the Trojans shall prevail,
And slay, until they reach the well-mann’d ships,
Till sets the sun, and darkness shrouds the earth.”

He said, and in their breasts fresh spirit infus’d;
They, shaking from their manes the dust, the car
Amid the Greeks and Trojans lightly bore.
Then, as a vulture ’mid a flock of geese,
Amid the battle rush’d Automedon,
His horses’ course directing, and their speed
Exciting, though he mourn’d his comrade slain.
Swiftly he fled from out the Trojan host;
Swiftly again assail’d them in pursuit;
Yet, speedy to pursue, he could not slay;
Nor, in the car alone, had pow’r at once
To guide the flying steeds, and hurl the spear.
At length a comrade brave, Alcimedon,
Laerces’ son, beheld; behind the car
He stood, and thus Automedon address’d:
“Automedon, what God has fill’d thy mind
With counsels vain, and thee of sense bereft?
That with the Trojans, in the foremost ranks,
Thou fain wouldst fight alone, thy comrade slain,
While Hector proudly on his breast displays
The glorious arms of great Æacides.”

To whom Automedon, Diores’ son:
“Alcimedon, since none of all the Greeks
May vie with thee, the mettle to control
Of these immortal horses, save indeed,
While yet he liv’d, Patroclus, godlike chief;
But him stern death and fate have overta’en;
Take thou the whip and shining reins, while I,
Descending from the car, engage in fight.”

He said; and, mounting on the war-car straight,
Alcimedon the whip and reins assum’d;
Down leap’d Automedon; great Hector saw,
And thus address’d Æneas at his side:

“Æneas, prince and counsellor of Troy,
I see, committed to unskilful hands,
Achilles’ horses on the battle-field:
These we may hope to take, if such thy will;
For they, methinks, will scarcely stand oppos’d,
Or dare th’ encounter of our joint assault.”

He said; Anchises’ valiant son complied;
Forward they went, their shoulders cover’d o’er
With stout bull’s-hide, thick overlaid with brass.
With them both Chromius and Aretus went;

And high their hopes were rais’d, the warriors both
To slay, and make the strong-neck’d steeds their prize:
Blind fools! nor destin’d scatheless to escape
Automedon’s encounter; he his pray’r
To Jove address’d, and straight with added strength
His soul was fill’d; and to Alcimedon,
His trusty friend and comrade, thus he spoke:

“Alcimedon, do thou the horses keep
Not far away, but breathing on my neck;
For Hector’s might will not, I deem, be stay’d,
Ere us he slay, and mount Achilles’ car,
And carry terror ’mid the Grecian host,
Or in the foremost ranks himself be slain.”

Thus spoke Automedon, and loudly call’d
On Menelaus and th’ Ajaces both:
“Ye two Ajaces, leaders of the host,
And, Menelaus, with our bravest all,
Ye on the dead alone your care bestow,
To guard him, and stave off the hostile ranks;
But haste, and us, the living, save from death;
For Hector and Æneas hitherward,
With weight o’erpow’ring, through the bloody press,
The bravest of the Trojans, force their way:
Yet is the issue in the hands of Heav’n;
I hurl the spear, but Jove directs the blow.”

He said, and, poising, hurl’d the pond’rous spear;
Full on Aretus’ broad-orb’d shield it struck;
Nor stay’d the shield its course; the brazen point
Drove through the belt, and in his body lodg’d.
As with sharp axe in hand a stalwart man,
Striking behind the horns a sturdy bull,
Severs the neck; he, forward, plunging, falls;
So forward first he sprang, then backwards fell:
And quiv’ring, in his vitals deep infix’d,
The sharp spear soon relax’d his limbs in death.
Then at Automedon great Hector threw
His glitt’ring spear; he saw, and forward stoop’d,
And shunn’d the brazen death; behind him far
Deep in the soil infix’d, with quiv’ring shaft
The weapon stood; there Mars its impulse stay’d.
And now with swords, and hand to hand, the fight
Had been renew’d; but at their comrade’s call
The two Ajaces, pressing through the throng,
Between the warriors interpos’d in haste.
Before them Hector and Æneas both,
And godlike Chromius, in alarm recoil’d;
Pierc’d through the heart, Aretus there they left;
And, terrible as Mars, Automedon
Stripp’d off his arms, and thus exulting cried:
“Of some small portion of its load of grief,
For slain Patroclus, is my heart reliev’d,
In slaying thee, all worthless as thou art.”

Then, throwing on the car the bloody spoils,
He mounted, hands and feet imbrued with blood,
As ’twere a lion, fresh from his repast
Upon the carcase of a slaughter’d bull.

Again around Patroclus’ body rag’d
The stubborn conflict, direful, sorrow-fraught:
From Heav’n descending, Pallas stirr’d the strife,
Sent by all-seeing Jove to stimulate
The warlike Greeks; so changed was now his will.
As o’er the face of Heav’n when Jove extends
His bright-hued bow, a sign to mortal men
Of war, or wintry storms, which bid surcease
The rural works of man, and pinch the flocks;
So Pallas, in a bright-hued cloud array’d,
Pass’d through the ranks, and rous’d each sev’ral man.
To noble Menelaus, Atreus’ son,
Who close beside her stood, the Goddess first,
The form of Phoenix and his pow’rful voice
Assuming, thus her stirring words address’d:

“On thee, O Menelaus, foul reproach
Will fasten, if Achilles’ faithful friend
The dogs devour beneath the walls of Troy;
Then hold thou firm, and all the host inspire.”

To whom thus Menelaus, good in fight:
“O Phoenix, aged warrior, honour’d sire,
If Pallas would the needful pow’r impart,
And o’er me spread her aegis, then would I
Undaunted for Patroclus’ rescue fight,
For deeply by his death my heart is touch’d;
But valiant Hector, with the strength of fire
Still rages, and destruction deals around:
For Jove is with him, and his triumph wills.”

He said: the blue-ey’d Goddess heard with joy
That, chief of all the Gods, her aid he sought.
She gave fresh vigour to his arms and knees,
And to his breast the boldness of the fly,
Which, oft repell’d by man, renews th’ assault
Incessant, lur’d by taste of human blood;
Such boldness in Atrides’ manly breast
Pallas inspir’d: beside Patroclus’ corpse
Again he stood, and pois’d his glitt’ring spear.

There was one Podes in the Trojan ranks,
Son of Eetion, rich, of blameless life,
Of all the people most to Hector dear,
And at his table oft a welcome guest:
Him, as he turn’d to fly, beneath the waist
Atrides struck; right through the spear was driv’n;
Thund’ring he fell; and Atreus’ son the corpse
Dragg’d from the Trojans ’mid the ranks of Greece.

Then close at Hector’s side Apollo stood,
Clad in the form of Phaenops, Asius’ son,
Who in Abydos dwelt; of all th’ Allies
Honour’d of Hector most, and best belov’d;
Clad in his form, the Far-destroyer spoke:

“Hector, what other Greek will scare thee next?
Who shrink’st from Menelaus, heretofore
A warrior deem’d of no repute; but now,
Alone, he robs our Trojans of their dead;
And in the foremost ranks e’en now hath slain
Podes, thine own good friend, Eetion’s son.”

He said; dark grief o’erclouded Hector’s brow,
As to the front in dazzling arms he sprang.
Then Saturn’s son his tassell’d aegis wav’d,
All glitt’ring bright; and Ida’s lofty head
In clouds and darkness shrouded; then he bade
His lightning flash, his volleying thunder roar,
That shook the mountain; and with vict’ry crown’d
The Trojan arms, and panic-struck the Greeks.

The first who turn’d to fly was Peneleus,
Bœotian chief; him, facing still the foe,
A spear had slightly on the shoulder struck,
The bone just grazing: by Polydamas,
Who close before him stood, the spear was thrown.
Then Hector Leitus, Aloctryon’s son,
Thrust thro’ the wrist, and quell’d his warlike might;
Trembling, he look’d around, nor hop’d again
The Trojans, spear in hand, to meet in fight;
But, onward as he rush’d on Leitus,
Idomeneus at Hector threw his spear:
Full on his breast it struck; but near the head
The sturdy shaft was on the breastplate snapp’d:
Loud was the Trojans’ shout; and he in turn
Aim’d at Idomeneus, Deucalion’s son,
Upstanding on his car; his mark he miss’d,
But Coeranus he struck, the charioteer
And faithful follower of Meriones,
Who with him came from Lyctus’ thriving town:
The chief had left on foot the well-trimm’d ships;
And, had not Coeranus his car in haste
Driv’n to the rescue, by his fall had giv’n
A Trojan triumph; to his Lord he brought
Safety, and rescue from unsparing death;
But fell, himself, by Hector’s murd’rous hand.
Him Hector struck between the cheek and ear,
Crashing the teeth, and cutting through the tongue.
Headlong he fell to earth, and dropp’d the reins:
These, stooping from the car, Meriones
Caught up, and thus Idomeneus address’d:

“Ply now the lash, until thou reach the ships:
Thyself must see how crush’d the strength of Greece.”

He said; and tow’rd the ships Idomeneus
Urg’d his fleet steeds; for fear was on his soul.
Nor did not Ajax and Atrides see
How in the Trojans’ favour Saturn’s son
The wav’ring scale of vict’ry turn’d; and thus
Great Ajax Telamon his grief express’d:

“O Heav’n! the veriest child might plainly see
That Jove the Trojans’ triumph has decreed:
Their weapons all, by whomsoever thrown,
Or weak, or strong, attain their mark; for Jove
Directs their course; while ours upon the plain
Innocuous fall. But take we counsel now
How from the fray to bear away our dead,
And by our own return rejoice those friends
Who look with sorrow on our plight, and deem
That we, all pow’rless to resist the might
Of Hector’s arm, beside the ships must fall.
Would that some comrade were at hand, to bear
A message to Achilles; him, I ween,
As yet the mournful tidings have not reach’d,
That on the field his dearest friend lies dead.
But such I see not; for a veil of cloud
O’er men and horses all around is spread.
O Father Jove, from, o’er the sons of Greece
Remove this cloudy darkness; clear the sky,
That we may see our fate, and die at least,
If such thy will, in th’ open light of day.”

He said, and, pitying, Jove beheld his tears;
The clouds he scatter’d, and the mist dispers’d;
The sun shone forth, and all the field was clear;
Then Ajax thus to Menelaus spoke:

“Now, Heav’n-born Menelaus, look around
If haply ’mid the living thou mayst see
Antilochus, the noble Nestor’s son;
And bid him to Achilles bear in haste
The tidings, that his dearest friend lies dead.”

He said, nor did Atrides not comply;
But slow as moves a lion from the fold,
Which dogs and youths with ceaseless toil hath worn,
Who all night long have kept their watch, to guard
From his assault the choicest of the herd;
He, hunger-pinch’d, hath oft th’ attempt renew’d,
But nought prevail’d; by spears on ev’ry side,
And jav’lins met, wielded by stalwart hands,
And blazing torches, which his courage daunt;
Till with the morn he sullenly withdraws;
So from Patroclus, with reluctant step
Atrides mov’d; for much he fear’d the Greeks
Might to the Trojans, panic-struck, the dead
Abandon; and departing, he besought
The two Ajaces and Meriones:
“Ye two Ajaces, leaders of the Greeks,
And thou, Meriones, remember now
Our lost Patroclus’ gentle courtesy,
How kind and genial was his soul to all,
While yet he liv’d—now sunk, alas! in death.”

Thus saying, Menelaus took his way,
Casting his glance around on ev’ry side,
Like to an eagle, fam’d of sharpest sight
Of all that fly beneath the vault of Heav’n;
Whom, soaring in the clouds, the crouching hare
Eludes not, though in leafiest covert hid;
But swooping down, he rends her life away:
So, Menelaus, through the ranks of war
Thy piercing glances ev’ry way were turn’d,
If Nestor’s son, alive, thou mightst descry;
Him on the field’s extremest left he found,
Cheering his friends, and urging to the fight;
He stood beside him, and address’d him thus:

“Antilochus, come hither, godlike friend,
And woful tidings hear, which would to Heav’n
I had not to impart; thyself thou seest
How Jove hath heap’d disaster on the Greeks,
And vict’ry giv’n to Troy; but one has fallen,
Our bravest, best! Patroclus lies in death;
And deeply must the Greeks his loss deplore.
But haste thee to the ships, to Peleus’ son
The tidings bear, if haply he may save
The body of Patroclus from the foe;
His naked body, for his arms are now
The prize of Hector of the glancing helm.”

He said; and at his words Antilochus
Astounded stood; long time his tongue in vain
For utt’rance strove; his eyes were fill’d with tears,
His cheerful voice was mute; yet not the less
To Menelaus’ bidding gave his care:
Swiftly he sped; but to Laodocus,
His comrade brave, who waited with his car
In close attendance, first consign’d his arms;
Then from the field with active limbs he flew,
Weeping, with mournful news, to Peleus’ son.
Nor, noble Menelaus, did thy heart
Incline thee to remain, and aid thy friends,
Where from their war-worn ranks the Pylian troops
Deplor’d the absence of Antilochus;
But these in godlike Thrasymedes’ charge
He left; and to Patroclus hast’ning back,
Beside th’ Ajaces stood, as thus he spoke:
“Him to Achilles, to the ships, in haste
I have despatch’d; yet fiercely as his wrath
May burn tow’rd Hector, I can scarce expect
His presence here; for how could he, unarm’d,
With Trojans fight? But take we counsel now
How from the field to bear away our dead,
And ’scape ourselves from death by Trojan hands.”

Whom answer’d thus great Ajax Telamon:
“Illustrious Menelaus, all thy words
Are just and true; then from amid the press,
Thou and Meriones, take up in haste,
And bear away the body; while behind
We two, in heart united, as in name,
Who side by side have still been wont to fight,
Will Hector and his Trojans hold at bay.”

He said; they, lifting in their arms the corpse,
Uprais’d it high in air; then from behind
Loud yell’d the Trojans, as they saw the Greeks
Retiring with their dead; and on they rush’d,
As dogs that in advance of hunter youths
Pursue a wounded boar; awhile they run,
Eager for blood; but when, in pride of strength,
He turns upon them, backward they recoil,
This way and that in fear of death dispers’d:
So onward press’d awhile the Trojan crowd,
With thrust of swords, and double-pointed spears;
But ever as th’ Ajaces turn’d to bay,
Their colour chang’d to pale, not one so bold
As, dashing on, to battle for the corpse.
Thus they, with anxious care, from off the field
Bore tow’rd the ships their dead; but on their track
Came sweeping on the storm of battle, fierce,
As, on a sudden breaking forth, the fire
Seizes some populous city, and devours
House after house amid the glare and blaze,
While roar the flames before the gusty wind;
So fiercely pressed upon the Greeks’ retreat
The clatt’ring tramp of steeds and armed men.
But as the mules, with stubborn strength endued,
That down the mountain through the trackless waste
Drag some huge log, or timber for the ships;
And spent with toil and sweat, still labour on
Unflinching; so the Greeks with patient toil
Bore on their dead; th’ Ajaces in their rear
Stemming the war, as stems the torrent’s force
Some wooded cliff, far stretching o’er the plain;
Checking the mighty river’s rushing stream,
And flinging it aside upon the plain,
Itself unbroken by the strength of flood:
So firmly, in the rear, th’ Ajaces stemm’d
The Trojan force; yet these still onward press’d,
And, ’mid their comrades proudly eminent,
Two chiefs, Æneas, old Anchises’ son,
And glorious Hector, in the van were seen.
Then, as a cloud of starlings or of daws
Fly screaming, as they see the hawk approach,
To lesser birds the messenger of death;
So before Hector and Æneas fled,
Screaming, forgetful of their warlike fame,
The sons of Greece; and scatter’d here and there
Around the ditch lay store of goodly arms,
By Greeks abandon’d in their hasty flight.
Yet still, unintermitted, rag’d the war.





Thus, furious as the rage of fire, they fought.
Meantime Antilochus to Peleus’ son,
Swift-footed messenger, his tidings bore.
Him by the high-beak’d ships he found, his mind
Th’ event presaging, fill’d with anxious thoughts,
As thus he commun’d with his mighty heart:

“Alas! what means it, that the long-hair’d Greeks,
Chas’d from the plain, are thronging round the ships?
Let me not now, ye Gods, endure the grief
My mother once foretold, that I should live
To see the bravest of the Myrmidons
Cut off by Trojans from the light of day.
Menoetius’ noble son has surely fall’n;
Foolhardy! yet I warn’d him, and besought,
Soon as the ships from hostile fires were safe,
Back to return, nor Hector’s onset meet.”

While in his mind and spirit thus he mus’d,
Beside him stood the noble Nestor’s son,
And weeping, thus his mournful message gave:

“Alas! great son of Peleus, woful news,
Which would to Heav’n I had not to impart,
To thee I bring; Patroclus lies in death;
And o’er his body now the war is wag’d;
His naked body, for his arms are now
The prize of Hector of the glancing helm.”

He said; and darkest clouds of grief o’erspread
Achilles’ brow; with both his hands he seiz’d
And pour’d upon his head the grimy dust,
Marring his graceful visage; and defil’d
With black’ning ashes all his costly robes.
Stretch’d in the dust his lofty stature lay,
As with his hands his flowing locks he tore;
Loud was the wailing of the female band,
Achilles’ and Patroclus’ prize of war,
As round Achilles, rushing out of doors,
Beating their breasts, with tott’ring limbs they press’d.
In tears beside him stood Antilochus,
And in his own Achilles’ hand he held,
Groaning in spirit, fearful lest for grief
In his own bosom he should sheathe his sword.
Loud were his moans; his Goddess-mother heard,
Beside her aged father where she sat
In the deep ocean caves; she heard, and wept:
The Nereids all, in ocean’s depths who dwell,
Encircled her around; Cymodoce,[5]
Nesaee, Spio, and Cymothoe,
The stag-ey’d Halia, and Amphithoe,
Actaea, Limnorea, Melite,
Doris, and Galatea, Panope;
There too were Oreithyia, Clymene,
And Amathea with the golden hair,
And all the denizens of ocean’s depths.
Fill’d was the glassy cave; in unison
They beat their breasts, as Thetis led the wail:

“Give ear, my sister Nereids all, and learn
How deep the grief that in my breast I bear.
Me miserable! me, of noblest son
Unhappiest mother! me, a son who bore,
My brave, my beautiful, of heroes chief!
Like a young tree he throve: I tended him,
In a rich vineyard as the choicest plant;
Till in the beaked ships I sent him forth
To war with Troy; him ne’er shall I behold,
Returning home, in aged Peleus’ house.
E’en while he lives, and sees the light of day,
He lives in sorrow; nor, to soothe his grief,
My presence can avail; yet will I go,
That I may see my dearest child, and learn
What grief hath reach’d him, from the war withdrawn.”

She said, and left the cave; with her they went,
Weeping; before them parted th’ ocean wave.
But when they reach’d the fertile shore of Troy,
In order due they landed on the beach,
Where frequent, round Achilles swift of foot,
Were moor’d the vessels of the Myrmidons.
There, as he groan’d aloud, beside him stood
His Goddess-mother; weeping, in her hands
She held his head, while pitying thus she spoke:

“Why weeps my son? and what his cause of grief?
Speak out, and nought conceal; for all thy pray’r
Which with uplifted hands thou mad’st to Jove,
He hath fulfill’d, that, flying to their ships,
The routed sons of Greece should feel how much
They need thine aid, and mourn their insult past.”

To whom Achilles, deeply groaning, thus:
“Mother, all this indeed hath Jove fulfill’d;
Yet what avails it, since my dearest friend
Is slain, Patroclus? whom I honour’d most
Of all my comrades, lov’d him as my soul.
Him have I lost: and Hector from his corpse
Hath stripp’d those arms, those weighty, beauteous arms,
A marvel to behold, which from the Gods
Peleus receiv’d, a glorious gift, that day
When they consign’d thee to a mortal’s bed.
How better were it, if thy lot had been
Still ’mid the Ocean deities to dwell,
And Peleus had espous’d a mortal bride!
For now is bitter grief for thee in store,
Mourning thy son; whom to his home return’d
Thou never more shalt see; nor would I wish
To live, and move amid my fellow-men,
Unless that Hector, vanquish’d by my spear,
May lose his forfeit life, and pay the price
Of foul dishonour to Patroclus done.”

To whom, her tears o’erflowing, Thetis thus:
“E’en as thou sayst, my son, thy term is short;
Nor long shall Hector’s fate precede thine own.”

Achilles, answ’ring, spoke in passionate grief:
“Would I might die this hour, who fail’d to save
My comrade slain! far from his native land
He died, sore needing my protecting arm;
And I, who ne’er again must see my home,
Nor to Patroclus, nor the many Greeks
Whom Hector’s hand hath slain, have render’d aid;
But idly here I sit, cumb’ring the ground:
I, who amid the Greeks no equal own
In fight; to others, in debate, I yield.
Accurs’d of Gods and men be hateful strife
And anger, which to violence provokes
E’en temp’rate souls: though sweeter be its taste
Than dropping honey, in the heart of man
Swelling, like smoke; such anger in my soul
Hath Agamemnon kindled, King of men.
But pass we that; though still my heart be sore,
Yet will I school my angry spirit down.
In search of Hector now, of him who slew
My friend, I go; prepar’d to meet my death,
When Jove shall will it, and th’ Immortals all.
From death not e’en the might of Hercules,
Though best belov’d of Saturn’s son, could fly,
By fate and Juno’s bitter wrath subdued.
I too, since such my doom, must lie in death;
Yet, ere I die, immortal fame will win;
And from their delicate cheeks, deep-bosom’d dames,
Dardan and Trojan, bitter tears shall wipe,
And groan in anguish; then shall all men know
How long I have been absent from the field;
Then, though thou love me, seek not from the war
To stay my steps; for bootless were thy speech.”

Whom answer’d thus the silver-footed Queen:
“True are thy words, my son; and good it is,
And commendable, from the stroke of death
To save a worsted comrade; but thine arms,
Thy brazen, flashing arms, the Trojans hold:
Them Hector of the glancing helm himself
Bears on his breast, exulting; yet not long
Shall be his triumph, for his doom is nigh.
But thou, engage not in the toils of war,
Until thine eyes again behold me here;
For with to-morrow’s sun will I return
With arms of heav’nly mould, by Vulcan wrought.”

Thus saying, from her son she turn’d away,
And turning, to her sister Nereids spoke:
“Back to the spacious bosom of the deep
Retire ye now; and to my father’s house,
The aged Ocean God, your tidings bear;
While I to high Olympus speed, to crave
At Vulcan’s hand, the skill’d artificer,
A boon of dazzling armour for my son.”

She said; and they beneath the ocean wave
Descended, while to high Olympus sped
The silver-footed Goddess, thence in hope
To bear the dazzling armour to her son.
She to Olympus sped; the Greeks meanwhile
Before the warrior-slayer Hector fled
With wild, tumultuous uproar, till they reach’d
Their vessels and the shore of Hellespont.
Nor had the well-greav’d Greeks Achilles’ friend,
Patroclus, from amid the fray withdrawn;
For close upon him follow’d horse and man,
And Hector, son of Priam, fierce as flame;
Thrice noble Hector, seizing from behind,
Sought by the feet to drag away the dead,
Cheering his friends; thrice, clad in warlike might,
The two Ajaces drove him from his prey.
Yet, fearless in his strength, now rushing on
He dash’d amid the fray; now, shouting loud,
Stood firm; but backward not a step retir’d.
As from a carcase herdsmen strive in vain
To scare a tawny lion, hunger-pinch’d;
E’en so th’ Ajaces, mail-clad warriors, fail’d
The son of Priam from the corpse to scare.
And now the body had he borne away,
With endless fame; but from Olympus’ height
Came storm-swift Iris down to Peleus’ son,
And bade him don his arms; by Juno sent,
Unknown to Jove, and to th’ Immortals all.
She stood beside him, and address’d him thus:

“Up, son of Peleus! up, thou prince of men!
Haste to Patroclus’ rescue; whom, around,
Before the ships, is wag’d a fearful war,
With mutual slaughter; these the dead defending,
And those to Ilium’s breezy heights intent
To bear the body; noble Hector chief,
Who longs to sever from the tender neck,
And fix upon the spikes, thy comrade’s head.
Up then! delay no longer; deem it shame
Patroclus’ corpse should glut the dogs of Troy,
Dishon’ring thee, if aught dishonour him.”

Whom answer’d thus Achilles, swift of foot:
“Say, heav’nly Iris, of th’ immortal Gods
Who bade thee seek me, and this message bring?”

To whom swift Iris thus: “To thee I come
By Juno sent, th’ imperial wife of Jove;
Unknown to Saturn’s son, and all the Gods
Who on Olympus’ snowy summit dwell.”

To whom again Achilles, swift of foot:
“How in the battle toil can I engage?
My arms are with the Trojans; and to boot
My mother warn’d me not to arm for fight,
Till I again should see her; for she hop’d
To bring me heav’nly arms by Vulcan wrought:
Nor know I well whose armour I could wear,
Save the broad shield of Ajax Telamon
And he, methinks, amid the foremost ranks
Ev’n now is fighting o’er Patroclus’ corpse.”

Whom answer’d storm-swift Iris: “Well we know
Thy glorious arms are by the Trojans held;
But go thou forth, and from above the ditch
Appear before them; daunted at the sight,
Haply the Trojans may forsake the field,
And breathing-time afford the sons of Greece,
Toil-worn; for little pause has yet been theirs.”

Swift Iris said, and vanish’d; then uprose
Achilles, dear to Jove; and Pallas threw
Her tassell’d aegis o’er his shoulders broad;
His head encircling with a coronet
Of golden cloud, whence fiery flashes gleam’d.
As from an island city up to Heav’n
The smoke ascends, which hostile forces round
Beleaguer, and all day with cruel war
From its own state cut off; but when the sun
Hath set, blaze frequent forth the beacon fires;
High rise the flames, and to the dwellers round
Their signal flash, if haply o’er the sea
May come the needful aid; so brightly flash’d
That fiery light around Achilles’ head.
He left the wall, and stood above the ditch,
But from the Greeks apart, rememb’ring well
His mother’s prudent counsel; there he stood,
And shouted loudly; Pallas join’d her voice,
And fill’d with terror all the Trojan host.
Clear as the trumpet’s sound, which calls to arms
Some town, encompass’d round with hostile bands,
Rang out the voice of great Æacides.
But when Achilles’ voice of brass they heard,
They quail’d in spirit; the sleek-skin’d steeds themselves,
Conscious of coming ill, bore back the cars:
Their charioteers, dismay’d, beheld the flame
Which, kindled by the blue-ey’d Goddess, blaz’d
Unquench’d around the head of Peleus’ son.
Thrice shouted from the ditch the godlike chief;
Thrice terror struck both Trojans and Allies;
And there and then beside their chariots fell
Twelve of their bravest; while the Greeks, well pleas’d,
Patroclus’ body from the fray withdrew,
And on a litter laid; around him stood
His comrades mourning; with them, Peleus’ son,
Shedding hot tears, as on his friend he gaz’d,
Laid on the bier, and pierc’d with deadly wounds:
Him to the war with horses and with cars
He sent; but ne’er to welcome his return.
By stag-ey’d Juno sent, reluctant sank
Th’ unwearied sun beneath the ocean wave;
The sun had set, and breath’d awhile the Greeks
From the fierce labours of the balanc’d field;
Nor less the Trojans, from the stubborn fight
Retiring, from the chariots loos’d their steeds:
But ere they shar’d the ev’ning meal, they met
In council; all stood up; none dar’d to sit;
For fear had fallen on all, when reappear’d
Achilles, from the battle long withdrawn.
First Panthous’ son, the sage Polydamas,
Address’d th’ assembly; his sagacious mind
Alone beheld the future and the past;
The friend of Hector, born the selfsame night;
One in debate, the other best in arms;
Who thus with prudent speech began, and said:

“Be well advis’d, my friends! my counsel is
That we regain the city, nor the morn
Here in the plain, beside the ships, await,
So far remov’d from our protecting walls.
While fiercely burn’d ’gainst Atreus’ godlike son
That mighty warrior’s wrath, ’twas easier far
With th’ other Greeks to deal; and I rejoic’d
When by the ships we pass’d the night, in hopes
We soon might call them ours; but now, I own
Achilles, swift of foot, excites my fear.
His proud, impetuous spirit will spurn the plain,
Where Greeks and Trojans oft in warlike strife
Their balanc’d strength exert; if he come forth,
Our fight will be to guard our homes and wives.
Gain we the city; trust me, so ’twere best.
Now, for a while, ambrosial night detains
The son of Peleus; but at early morn
If issuing forth in arms he find us here,
His prowess we shall know; and happy he
Who, flying, shall in safety reach the walls
Of sacred Troy; for many a Trojan slain
Shall feed the vultures; Heav’n avert such fate!
But if, though loth, ye will by me be rul’d,
This night in council husband we our strength;
While tow’rs, and lofty gates, and folding doors
Close join’d, well-fitting, shall our city guard:
Then issuing forth in arms at early morn
Man we the tow’rs; so harder were his task
If, from the ships advancing, round the wall
He offer battle; bootless to return,
His strong-neck’d horses worn with labour vain
In coursing, purposeless, around the town.
To force an entrance, or the town destroy,
Is not his aim; and ere that end be gain’d,
The dogs of Troy upon his flesh shall feed.”

To whom thus Hector of the glancing helm
With stern regard: “Polydamas, thy words
Are such as grate unkindly on mine ear,
Who fain wouldst have us to the walls retire.
What? have ye not already long enough
Been coop’d within the tow’rs? the wealth of Troy,
Its brass, its gold, were once the common theme
Of ev’ry tongue; our hoarded treasures now
Are gone, to Phrygian and Maeonian shores
For sale exported, costly merchandise,
Since on our city fell the wrath of Jove.
And now, when deep-designing Saturn’s son
Such glory gives me as to gain the ships,
And, crowded by the sea, hem in the Greeks,
Fool! put not thou these timid counsels forth,
Which none will follow, nor will I allow.
But hear ye all, and do as I advise:
Share now the meal, by ranks, throughout the host;
Then set your watch, and each keep careful guard;
And whom his spoils o’erload, if such there be,
Let him divide them with the gen’ral crowd;
Better that they should hold them than the Greeks:
And with the morn, in arms, beside the ships,
Will we again awake the furious war.
But if indeed Achilles by the ships
Hath reappear’d, himself, if so he choose,
Shall be the suff’rer; from the perilous strife
I will not shrink, but his encounter meet:
So he, or I, shall gain immortal fame;
Impartial Mars hath oft the slayer slain.”

Thus Hector spoke; the Trojans cheer’d aloud:
Fools, and by Pallas of their sense bereft,
Who all applauded Hector’s ill advice,
None the sage counsel of Polydamas!
Then through the camp they shar’d the ev’ning meal.

Meantime the Greeks all night with tears and groans
Bewail’d Patroclus: on his comrade’s breast
Achilles laid his murder-dealing hands,
And led with bitter groans the loud lament.
As when the hunters, in the forest’s depth,
Have robb’d a bearded lion of his cubs;
Too late arriving, he with anger chafes;
Then follows, if perchance he may o’ertake,
Through many a mountain glen, the hunters’ steps,
With grief and fury fill’d; so Peleus’ son,
With bitter groans, the Myrmidons address’d:

“Vain was, alas! the promise which I gave,
Seeking the brave Menoetius to console,
To bring to Opus back his gallant son,
Rich with his share of spoil from Troy o’erthrown;
But Jove fulfils not all that man designs:
For us hath fate decreed, that here in Troy
We two one soil should redden with our blood;
Nor me, returning to my native land,
Shall aged Peleus in his halls receive,
Nor Thetis; here must earth retain my bones.
But since, Patroclus, I am doom’d on earth
Behind thee to remain, thy fun’ral rites
I will not celebrate, till Hector’s arms,
And head, thy haughty slayer’s, here I bring;
And on thy pyre twelve noble sons of Troy
Will sacrifice, in vengeance of thy death.
Thou by our beaked ships till then must lie;
And weeping o’er thee shall deep-bosom’d dames,
Trojan and Dardan, mourn both night and day;
The prizes of our toil, when wealthy towns
Before our valour and our spears have fall’n.”

He said, and bade his comrades on the fire
An ample tripod place, without delay
To cleanse Patroclus from the bloody gore:
They on the burning fire the tripod plac’d,
With water fill’d, and kindled wood beneath.
Around the bellying tripod rose the flames,
Heating the bath; within the glitt’ring brass
Soon as the water boil’d, they wash’d the corpse,
With lissom oils anointing, and the wounds
With fragrant ointments fill’d, of nine years old;
Then in fine linen they the body wrapp’d
From head to feet, and laid it on a couch.
And cover’d over with a fair white sheet.
All night around Achilles swift of foot
The Myrmidons with tears Patroclus mourn’d.

To Juno then, his sister and his wife,
Thus Saturn’s son: “At length thou hast thy will,
Imperial Juno, who hast stirr’d to war
Achilles swift of foot; well might one deem
These long-hair’d Greeks from thee deriv’d their birth.”

To whom in answer thus the stag-ey’d Queen:
“What words, dread son of Saturn, dost thou speak?
E’en man, though mortal, and inferior far
To us in wisdom, might so much effect
Against his fellow-man; then how should I,
By double title chief of Goddesses,
First by my birth, and next because thy wife
I boast me, thine, o’er all the Gods supreme,
Not work my vengeance on the Trojan race?”

Such, converse while they held, to Vulcan’s house,
Immortal, starlike bright, among the Gods
Unrivall’d, all of brass, by Vulcan’s self
Constructed, sped the silver-footed Queen.
Him swelt’ring at his forge she found, intent
On forming twenty tripods, which should stand
The wall surrounding of his well-built house;
With golden wheels beneath he furnish’d each,
And to th’ assembly of the Gods endued
With pow’r to move spontaneous, and return,
A marvel to behold! thus far his work
He had completed; but not yet had fix’d
The rich-wrought handles; these his labour now
Engag’d, to fit them, and to rivet fast.
While thus he exercis’d his practis’d skill,
The silver-footed Queen approach’d the house.
Charis, the skilful artist’s wedded wife,
Beheld her coming, and advanc’d to meet;
And, as her hand she clasp’d, address’d her thus:

“Say, Thetis of the flowing robe, belov’d
And honour’d, whence this visit to our house,
An unaccustom’d guest? but come thou in,
That I may welcome thee with honour due.”

Thus, as she spoke, the Goddess led her in,
And on a seat with silver studs adorn’d,
Fair, richly wrought, a footstool at her feet,
She bade her sit; then thus to Vulcan call’d:
“Haste hither, Vulcan; Thetis asks thine aid.”

Whom answer’d thus the skill’d artificer:
“An honour’d and a venerated guest
Our house contains; who sav’d me once from woe,
When by my mother’s act from Heav’n I fell,
Who, for that I was crippled in my feet,
Deem’d it not shame to hide me: hard had then
My fortune been, had not Eurynome
And Thetis in their bosoms shelter’d me;
Eurynome, from old Oceanus
Who drew her birth, the ever-circling flood.
Nine years with them I dwelt, and many a work
I fashion’d there of metal, clasps, and chains
Of spiral coil, rich cups, and collars fair,
Hid in a cave profound; where th’ ocean stream
With ceaseless murmur foam’d and moan’d around;
Unknown to God or man, but to those two
Who sav’d me, Thetis and Eurynome.
Now to my house hath fair-hair’d Thetis come;
To her, my life preserv’d its tribute owes:
Then thou the hospitable rites perform.
While I my bellows and my tools lay by.”

He said, and from the anvil rear’d upright
His massive strength; and as he limp’d along,
His tottering knees were bow’d beneath his weight.
The bellows from the fire he next withdrew,
And in a silver casket plac’d his tools;
Then with a sponge his brows and lusty arms
He wip’d, and sturdy neck and hairy chest.
He donn’d his robe, and took his weighty staff;
Then through the door with halting step he pass’d;
There waited on their King the attendant maids;
In form as living maids, but wrought in gold;
Instinct with consciousness, with voice endued,
And strength, and skill from heav’nly teachers drawn.
These waited, duteous, at the Monarch’s side,
His steps supporting; he, with halting gait,
Pass’d to a gorgeous chair by Thetis’ side,
And, as her hand he clasp’d, address’d her thus:

“Say, Thetis of the flowing robe, belov’d
And honour’d, whence this visit to our house.
An unaccustom’d guest? say what thy will,
And, if within my pow’r, esteem it done.”

To whom in answer Thetis, weeping, thus:
“Vulcan, of all the Goddesses who dwell
On high Olympus, lives there one whose soul
Hath borne such weight of woe, so many griefs,
As Saturn’s son hath heap’d on me alone?
Me, whom he chose from all the sea-born nymphs,
And gave to Peleus, son of Æacus,
His subject; I endur’d a mortal’s bed,
Though sore against my will; he now, bent down
By feeble age, lies helpless in his house.
Now adds he farther grief; he granted me
To bear, and rear, a son, of heroes chief;
Like a young tree he throve; I tended him,
In a rich vineyard as the choicest plant:
Till in the beaked ships I sent him forth
To war with Troy; him ne’er shall I receive,
Returning home, in aged Peleus’ house.
E’en while he lives, and sees the light of day,
He lives in sorrow; nor, to soothe his grief,
My presence can avail; a girl, his prize,
Selected for him by the sons of Greece,
Great Agamemnon wrested from his arms:
In grief and rage he pin’d his soul away;
Then by the Trojans were the Greeks hemm’d in
Beside their ships, and from within their camp
No outlet found; the Grecian Elders then
Implor’d his aid, and promis’d costly gifts.
With his own hand to save them he refus’d;
But, in his armour clad, to battle sent
His friend Patroclus, with a num’rous band.
All day they fought before the Scaean* gates;
And in that day had Ilium been destroy’d,
But in the van, Menoetius’ noble son.
After great deeds achiev’d, Apollo slew,
And crown’d with glory Hector, Priam’s son.
Therefore a suppliant to thy knees I come,
If to my son, to early death condemn’d,
Thou wilt accord the boon of shield and helm,
And well-wrought greaves with silver clasps secur’d,
And breastplate; for his own, his faithful friend,
By Trojan hands subdued, hath lost; and he,
O’erwhelm’d with grief, lies prostrate on the earth.”

Whom answer’d thus the skill’d artificer:
“Take comfort, nor let this disturb thy mind;
Would that as surely, when his hour shall come,
I could defend him from the stroke of death,
As I can undertake that his shall be
Such arms as they shall marvel who behold.”

He left her thus, and to his forge return’d;
The bellows then directing to the fire,
He bade them work; through twenty pipes at once
Forthwith they pour’d their diverse-temper’d blasts;
Now briskly seconding his eager haste,
Now at his will, and as the work requir’d.
The stubborn brass, and tin, and precious gold,
And silver, first he melted in the fire,
Then on its stand his weighty anvil plac’d;
And with one hand the hammer’s pond’rous weight
He wielded, while the other grasp’d the tongs.

And first a shield he fashion’d, vast and strong,
With rich adornment; circled with a rim,
Threefold, bright-gleaming, whence a silver belt
Depended; of five folds the shield was form’d;
And on its surface many a rare design
Of curious art his practis’d skill had wrought.

Thereon were figur’d earth, and sky, and sea,
The ever-circling sun, and full-orb’d moon,
And all the signs that crown the vault of Heav’n;
Pleiads and Hyads, and Orion’s might,
And Arctos, call’d the Wain, who wheels on high
His circling course, and on Orion waits;
Sole star that never bathes in th’ ocean wave.

And two fair populous towns were sculptur’d there;
In one were marriage pomp and revelry.
And brides, in gay procession, through the streets
With blazing torches from their chambers borne,
While frequent rose the hymeneal song.
Youths whirl’d around in joyous dance, with sound
Of flute and harp; and, standing at their doors,
Admiring women on the pageant gaz’d.

Meanwhile a busy throng the forum fill’d:
There between two a fierce contention rose,
About a death-fine; to the public one
Appeal’d, asserting to have paid the whole;
While one denied that he had aught receiv’d.
Both were desirous that before the Judge
The issue should be tried; with noisy shouts
Their several partisans encourag’d each.
The heralds still’d the tumult of the crowd:
On polish’d chairs, in solemn circle, sat
The rev’rend Elders; in their hands they held
The loud-voic’d heralds’ sceptres; waving these,
They heard th’ alternate pleadings; in the midst
Two talents lay of gold, which he should take
Who should before them prove his righteous cause.

Before the second town two armies lay,
In arms refulgent; to destroy the town
Th’ assailants threaten’d, or among themselves
Of all the wealth within the city stor’d
An equal half, as ransom, to divide.
The terms rejecting, the defenders mann’d
A secret ambush; on the walls they plac’d
Women and children muster’d for defence,
And men by age enfeebled; forth they went,
By Mars and Pallas led; these, wrought in gold,
In golden arms array’d, above the crowd
For beauty and stature, as befitting Gods,
Conspicuous shone; of lesser height the rest.
But when the destin’d ambuscade was reach’d,
Beside the river, where the shepherds drove
Their flocks and herds to water, down they lay,
In glitt’ring arms accoutred; and apart
They plac’d two spies, to notify betimes
Th’ approach of flocks of sheep and lowing herds.
These, in two shepherds’ charge, ere long appear’d,
Who, unsuspecting as they mov’d along,
Enjoy’d the music of their past’ral pipes.
They on the booty, from afar discern’d,
Sprang from their ambuscade; and cutting off
The herds, and fleecy flocks, their guardians slew.
Their comrades heard the tumult, where they sat
Before their sacred altars, and forthwith
Sprang on their cars, and with fast-stepping steeds
Pursued the plund’rers, and o’ertook them soon.
There on the river’s bank they met in arms,
And each at other hurl’d their brazen spears.
And there were figur’d Strife, and Tumult wild,
And deadly Fate, who in her iron grasp
One newly-wounded, one unwounded bore,
While by the feet from out the press she dragg’d
Another slain: about her shoulders hung
A garment crimson’d with the blood of men.
Like living men they seem’d to move, to fight,
To drag away the bodies of the slain.

And there was grav’n a wide-extended plain
Of fallow land, rich, fertile, mellow soil,
Thrice plough’d; where many ploughmen up and down
Their teams were driving; and as each attain’d
The limit of the field, would one advance,
And tender him a cup of gen’rous wine:
Then would he turn, and to the end again
Along the furrow cheerly drive his plough.
And still behind them darker show’d the soil,
The true presentment of a new-plough’d field,
Though wrought in gold; a miracle of art.

There too was grav’n a corn-field, rich in grain,
Where with sharp sickles reapers plied their task,
And thick, in even swathe, the trusses fell;
The binders, following close, the bundles tied:
Three were the binders; and behind them boys
In close attendance waiting, in their arms
Gather’d the bundles, and in order pil’d.
Amid them, staff in hand, in silence stood
The King, rejoicing in the plenteous swathe.
A little way remov’d, the heralds slew
A sturdy ox, and now beneath an oak
Prepar’d the feast; while women mix’d, hard by,
White barley porridge for the lab’rers’ meal.

And, with rich clusters laden, there was grav’n
A vineyard fair, all gold; of glossy black
The bunches were, on silver poles sustain’d;
Around, a darksome trench; beyond, a fence
Was wrought, of shining tin; and through it led
One only path, by which the bearers pass’d,
Who gather’d in the vineyard’s bounteous store.
There maids and youths, in joyous spirits bright,
In woven baskets bore the luscious fruit.
A boy, amid them, from a clear-ton’d harp
Drew lovely music; well his liquid voice
The strings accompanied; they all with dance
And song harmonious join’d, and joyous shouts,
As the gay bevy lightly tripp’d along.

Of straight-horn’d cattle too a herd was grav’n;
Of gold and tin the heifers all were wrought:
They to the pasture, from the cattle-yard,
With gentle lowings, by a babbling stream,
Where quiv’ring reed-beds rustled, slowly mov’d.
Four golden shepherds walk’d beside the herd,
By nine swift dogs attended; then amid
The foremost heifers sprang two lions fierce
Upon the lordly bull: he, bellowing loud,
Was dragg’d along, by dogs and youths pursued.
The tough bull’s-hide they tore, and gorging lapp’d
Th’ intestines and dark blood; with vain attempt
The herdsmen following closely, to the attack
Cheer’d their swift dogs; these shunn’d the lions’ jaws,
And close around them baying, held aloof.

And there the skilful artist’s hand had trac’d
A pastaro broad, with fleecy flocks o’erspread,
In a fair glade, with fold, and tents, and pens.

There, too, the skilful artist’s hand had wrought
With curious workmanship, a mazy dance,
Like that which Daedalus in Cnossus erst
At fair-hair’d Ariadne’s bidding fram’d.
There, laying each on other’s wrists their hand,
Bright youths and many-suitor’d maidens danc’d:
In fair white linen these; in tunics those,
Well woven, shining soft with fragrant oils;
These with fair coronets were crown’d, while those
With golden swords from silver belts were girt.
Now whirl’d they round with nimble practis’d feet,
Easy, as when a potter, seated, turns
A wheel, new fashion’d by his skilful hand,
And spins it round, to prove if true it run;
Now featly mov’d in well-beseeming ranks.
A num’rous crowd, around, the lovely dance
Survey’d, delighted; while an honour’d Bard
Sang, as he struck the lyre, and to the strain
Two tumblers, in the midst, were whirling round.

About the margin of the massive shield
Was wrought the mighty strength of th’ ocean stream.

The shield completed, vast and strong, he forg’d
A breastplate, dazzling bright as flame of fire;
And next, a weighty helmet for his head,
Fair, richly wrought, with crest of gold above;
Then last, well-fitting greaves of pliant tin.

The skill’d artificer his works complete
Before Achilles’ Goddess-mother laid:
She, like a falcon, from the snow-clad heights
Of huge Olympus, darted swiftly down,
Charg’d with the glitt’ring arms by Vulcan wrought.




Now morn in saffron robe, from th’ ocean stream
Ascending, light diffus’d o’er Gods and men;
As Thetis, to the ships returning, bore
The gift of Vulcan; there her son she found,
Who o’er Patroclus hung in bitter grief;
Around him mourn’d his comrades; in the midst
She stood, and clasp’d his hand, as thus she spoke:

“Leave we, my son, though deep our grief, the dead;
Here let him lie, since Heav’n hath doom’d his fall;
But thou these arms receive, by Vulcan sent,
Fairer than e’er on mortal breast were borne.”
The arms before Achilles, as she spoke,
The Goddess laid; loud rang the wondrous work.
With awe the Myrmidons beheld; nor dar’d
Affront the sight: but as Achilles gaz’d,
More fiery burn’d his wrath; beneath his brows
His eyes like lightning flash’d; with fierce delight
He seiz’d the glorious gift: and when his soul
Had feasted on the miracle of art,
To Thetis thus his winged words address’d:

“Mother, the God hath giv’n me arms indeed,
Worthy a God, and such as mortal man
Could never forge; I go to arm me straight;
Yet fear I for Menoetius’ noble son,
Lest in his spear-inflicted wounds the flies
May gender worms, and desecrate the dead,
And, life extinct, corruption reach his flesh.”

Whom answer’d thus the silver-footed Queen:
“Let not such fears, my son, disturb thy mind:
I will myself the swarms of flies disperse,
That on the flesh of slaughter’d warriors prey:
And should he here remain a year complete,
Still should his flesh be firm and fresh as now:
But thou to council call the chiefs of Greece;
Against the monarch Agamemnon there,
The leader of the host, abjure thy wrath;
Then arm thee quickly, and put on thy might.”

Her words with dauntless courage fill’d his breast.
She in Patroclus’ nostrils, to preserve
His flesh, red nectar and ambrosia pour’d.

Along the ocean beach Achilles pass’d,
And loudly shouting, call’d on all the chiefs;
Then all who heretofore remain’d on board,
The steersmen, who the vessels’ rudders hold,
The very stewards that serv’d the daily bread,
All to th’ assembly throng’d, when reappear’d
Achilles, from the fight so long withdrawn.
Two noble chiefs, two ministers of Mars,
Ulysses sage, and valiant Diomed,
Appear’d, yet crippled by their grievous wounds,
Their halting steps supporting with their spears,
And on the foremost seats their places took.
Next follow’d Agamemnon, King of men,
He also wounded; for Antenor’s son,
Coon, had stabb’d him in the stubborn fight.
When all the Greeks were closely throng’d around,
Up rose Achilles swift of foot, and said:

“Great son of Atreus, what hath been the gain
To thee or me, since heart-consuming strife
Hath fiercely rag’d between us, for a girl,
Who would to Heav’n had died by Dian’s shafts
That day when from Lyrnessus’ captur’d town
I bore her off? so had not many a Greek
Bitten the bloody dust, by hostile hands
Subdued, while I in anger stood aloof.
Great was the gain to Troy; but Greeks, methinks,
Will long retain the mem’ry of our feud.
Yet pass we that; and though our hearts be sore,
Still let us school our angry spirits down.
My wrath I here abjure; it is not meet
It burn for ever unappeas’d; do thou
Muster to battle straight the long-hair’d Greeks;
That, to the Trojans once again oppos’d,
I may make trial if beside the ships
They dare this night remain; but he, I ween,
Will gladly rest his limbs, who safe shall fly,
My spear escaping, from the battle-field.”

He said: the well-greav’d Greeks rejoic’d to hear
His wrath abjur’d by Peleus’ godlike son;
And from his seat, not standing in the midst,
Thus to th’ assembly Agamemnon spoke:
“Friends, Grecian Heroes, Ministers of Mars,
When one stands up to speak, ’tis meet for all
To lend a patient ear, nor interrupt;
For e’en to practis’d speakers hard the task:
But, in this vast assembly, who can speak
That all may hear? the clearest voice must fail.
To Peleus’ son, Achilles, I my mind
Will frankly open; ye among yourselves
Impart the words I speak, that all may know.
Oft hath this matter been by Greeks discuss’d,
And I their frequent censure have incurr’d:
Yet was not I the cause; but Jove, and Fate,
And gloomy Erinnys, who combin’d to throw
A strong delusion o’er my mind, that day
I robb’d Achilles of his lawful prize.
What could I do? a Goddess all o’er-rul’d,
Daughter of Jove, dread Ate, baleful pow’r,
Misleading all; with lightest step she moves,
Not on the earth, but o’er the heads of men,
With blighting touch; and many hath caus’d to err.
E’en Jove, the wisest deem’d of Gods and men,
In error she involv’d, when Juno’s art
By female stratagem the God deceiv’d,
When in well-girdled Thebes Alcmena lay
In travail of the might of Hercules.
In boastful tone amid the Gods he spoke:
‘Hear all ye Gods, and all ye Goddesses,
The words I speak, the promptings of my soul.
This day Lucina shall to light bring forth
A child, the future Lord of all around,
Of mortal men, who trace to me their blood.’
Whom answer’d Juno thus, with deep deceit:
‘Thou dost but feign, nor wilt fulfil thy word:
Come now, Olympian, swear a solemn oath
That he shall be the Lord of all around,
Who on this day shall be of woman born,
Of mortal men, who trace to thee their blood.’
She said, and Jove, the snare unseeing, swore
A solemn oath; but found his error soon.
Down from Olympus’ height she sped in haste
To Argos of Achaia; for the wife
Of Sthenelus, the son of Perseus, there,
She knew, was sev’n months pregnant of a son;
Whom, though untimely born, she brought to light,
Staying meanwhile Alcmena’s labour-pangs,
To Saturn’s son herself the tidings brought,
And thus address’d him: ‘Jove, the lightning’s Lord,
I bring thee news; this day a mighty man,
By thee ordain’d to be the Argives’ King,
Is born, Eurystheus, son of Sthenelus,
The son of Perseus, issue of thy blood;
Well worthy he to be the Argives’ King.’
She said: keen sorrow deeply pierc’d his soul;
Then Ate by the glossy locks he seiz’d
In mighty wrath; and swore a solemn oath,
That to Olympus and the starry Heav’n
She never should return, who all misleads.
His arm then whirling, from the starry Heav’n
He flung her down, to vex th’ affairs of men.
Yet oft her fraud remember’d he with groans,
When by Eurystheus’ hard commands he saw
Condemn’d to servile tasks his noble son.
So, oft as Hector of the glancing helm
Beside the ships the Greeks to slaughter gave,
Back to my mind my former error came.
I err’d, for Jove my judgment took away;
But friendly reconcilement now I seek,
And tender costly presents; then thyself
Uprouse thee, and excite the rest to arms.
While I prepare the gifts, whate’er of late[6]
The sage Ulysses promis’d in thy tent:
Or, if thou wilt, though eager for the fray,
Remain thou here awhile, till from my ship
My followers bring the gifts; that thou mayst see
I make my offerings with no niggard hand.”

Whom answer’d thus Achilles swift of foot:
“Most mighty Agamemnon, King of men,
The gifts thou deem’st befitting, ’tis for thee
To give, or to withhold; but now at once
Prepare we for the battle; ’tis not meet
On trivial pretexts here to waste our time,
Or idly loiter; much remains to do:
Again be seen Achilles in the van,
Scatt’ring with brazen spear the Trojan ranks;
And ye, forget not man with man to fight.”

To whom in answer sage Ulysses thus:
“Brave as thou art, Achilles, godlike chief,
Yet fasting lead not forth the sons of Greece
To fight the Trojans; for no little time
Will last the struggle, when the serried ranks
Are once engag’d in conflict, and the Gods
With equal courage either side inspire:
But bid them, by the ships, of food and wine
(Wherein are strength and courage) first partake;
For none throughout the day till set of sun,
Fasting from food, may bear the toils of war;
His spirit may still be eager for the fray;
Yet are his limbs by slow degrees weigh’d down,
Himself by thirst and hunger worn, his knees
Unable, as he moves, to bear his weight.
But he who, first with food and wine refresh’d,
All day maintains the combat with the foe,
His spirit retains unbroken, and his limbs
Unwearied, till both armies quit the field.
Disperse then now the crowd, and bid prepare
The morning meal; meantime to public view
Let Agamemnon, King of men, display
His costly gifts; that all the Greeks may see,
And that thy heart within thee melt with joy:
And there in full assembly let him swear
A solemn oath, that he hath ne’er approach’d
The fair Briseis’ bed, nor held with her
Such intercourse as man with woman holds.
Be thou propitious, and accept his oath.
Then at a sumptuous banquet in his tent
Let him receive thee; that thine honour due
May nothing lack; and so, Atrides, thou
Shalt stand in sight of all men clear of blame;
For none can wonder that insulting speech
Should rouse the anger of a sceptred King.”

To whom thus Agamemnon, King of men:
“Son of Laertes, I accept thy speech
With cordial welcome: all that thou hast said
Is well and wisely spoken; for the oath,
I am prepar’d, with willing mind, to swear;
Nor in the sight of Heav’n will be forsworn.
Let then Achilles here awhile remain,
Though eager for the fray; ye too remain,
Until the presents from my tent be brought,
And we our solemn compact ratify.
Then this command upon thyself I lay:
That thou the noblest youths of all the Greeks
Select, and bid them from my vessel bear
The gifts, which, to Achilles yesternight
We promis’d, and withal the women bring;
And let Talthybius through the host seek out
A boar, for sacrifice to Jove and Sol.”

Whom answer’d thus Achilles swift of foot:
“Most mighty Agamemnon, King of men,
These matters to some future time were best
Deferr’d, some hour of respite from the fight,
Of rage less fiercely burning in my breast;
But slaughter’d now they lie, whom Priam’s son,
Hector, hath slain, by Jove to vict’ry led.
Ye bid us take our food; if I might rule,
I would to battle lead the sons of Greece,
Unfed, and fasting; and at set of sun,
Our shame aveng’d, an ample feast prepare;
Till then, nor food nor drink shall pass my lips,
My comrade slain; who pierc’d with mortal wounds,
Turn’d tow’rd the doorway, lies within my tent,
His mourning friends around; while there he lies,
No thought have I for these or aught beside,
Save carnage, blood, and groans of dying men.”

To whom Ulysses, sage in council, thus:
“O son of Peleus, noblest of the Greeks,
How far, Achilles, thou surpassest me
In deeds of arms, I know: but thou must yield
To me in counsel, for my years are more,
And my experience greater far than thine:
Then to my words incline a patient ear.
Men soonest weary of battle, where the sword
The bloodiest harvest reaps; the lightest crop
Of slaughter is where Jove inclines the scale,
Dispenser, at his will, of human wars.
The Greeks by fasting cannot mourn their dead;
For day by day successive numbers fall;
Where were the respite then from ceaseless fast?
Behoves us bury out of sight our dead,
Steeling our hearts, and weeping but a day;
And we, the rest, whom cruel war has spar’d,
Should first with food and wine recruit our strength;
Then, girding on our arms, the livelong day
Maintain the war, unwearied; then let none
Require a farther summons to the field;
(And woe to him who loit’ring by the ships
That summons hears;) but with united force
Against the Trojans wake the furious war.”

He said, and call’d on noble Nestor’s sons,
On Meges, Phyleus’ son, Meriones,
Thoas, and Lycomedes, Creon’s son,
And Melanippus; they together sought
The mighty monarch Agamemnon’s tent.
Soon as the word was giv’n, the work was done;
Sev’n tripods brought they out, the promis’d gifts;
Twelve horses, twenty caldrons glitt’ring bright;
Sev’n women too, well skill’d in household cares,
With whom, the eighth, the fair Briseis came.
Ulysses led the way, and with him brought
Ten talents full of gold; th’ attendant youths
The other presents bore, and in the midst
Display’d before th’ assembly: then uprose
The monarch Agamemnon; by his side,
With voice of godlike pow’r, Talthybius stood,
Holding the victim: then Atrides drew
The dagger, ever hanging at his side,
Close by the scabbard of his mighty sword,
And from the victim’s head the bristles shore.
With hands uplifted then to Jove he pray’d;
While all around the Greeks in silence stood,
List’ning, decorous, to the monarch’s words,
As looking up to Heav’n he made his pray’r:

“Be witness, Jove, thou highest, first of Gods,
And Sun, and Earth, and ye who vengeance wreak
Beneath the earth on souls of men forsworn,
Furies! that never, or to love unchaste
Soliciting, or otherwise, my hand
Hath fair Briseis touch’d; but in my tent
Still pure and undefil’d hath she remain’d:
And if in this I be forsworn, may Heav’n
With all the plagues afflict me, due to those
Who sin by perjur’d oaths against the Gods.”

Thus as he spoke, across the victim’s throat
He drew the pitiless blade; Talthybius then
To hoary Ocean’s depths the carcase threw,
Food for the fishes; then Achilles rose,
And thus before th’ assembled Greeks he spoke:

“O Father Jove, how dost thou lead astray
Our human judgments! ne’er had Atreus’ son
My bosom fill’d with wrath, nor from my arms,
To his own loss, against my will had torn
The girl I lov’d, but that the will of Jove
To death predestin’d many a valiant Greek.
Now to the meal; anon renew the war.”

This said, th’ assembly he dismiss’d in haste,
The crowd dispersing to their sev’ral ships;
Upon the gifts the warlike Myrmidons
Bestow’d their care, and bore them to the ships;
Of Peleus’ godlike son; within the tent
They laid them down, and there the women plac’d,
While to the drove the followers led the steeds.
Briseis, fair as golden Venus, saw
Patroclus lying, pierc’d with mortal wounds,
Within the tent; and with a bitter cry,
She flung her down upon the corpse, and tore
Her breast, her delicate neck, and beauteous cheeks;
And, weeping, thus the lovely woman wail’d:

“Patroclus, dearly lov’d of this sad heart!
When last I left this tent, I left thee full
Of healthy life; returning now, I find
Only thy lifeless corpse, thou Prince of men!
So sorrow still, on sorrow heap’d, I bear.
The husband of my youth, to whom my sire
And honour’d mother gave me, I beheld
Slain with the sword before the city walls:
Three brothers, whom with me one mother bore,
My dearly lov’d ones, all were doom’d to death:
Nor wouldst thou, when Achilles swift of foot
My husband slew, and royal Mynes’ town
In ruin laid, allow my tears to flow;
But thou wouldst make me (such was still thy speech)
The wedded wife of Peleus’ godlike son:
Thou wouldst to Phthia bear me in thy ship,
And there, thyself, amid the Myrmidons,
Wouldst give my marriage feast; then, unconsol’d,
I weep thy death, my ever-gentle friend!”

Weeping, she spoke; the women join’d her wail:
Patroclus’ death the pretext for their tears,
But each in secret wept her private griefs.

Around Achilles throng’d the elder men,
Urging to eat; but he, with groans, refus’d:
“I pray you, would you show your love, dear friends,
Ask me not now with food or drink to appease
Hunger or thirst; a load of bitter grief
Weighs heavy on my soul; till set of sun
Fasting will I remain, and still endure.”

The other monarchs at his word withdrew:
The two Atridae, and Ulysses sage,
And Nestor and Idomeneus remain’d,
And aged Phoenix, to divert his grief;
But comfort none, save in the bloody jaws
Of battle would he take; by mem’ry stirr’d,
He heav’d a deep-drawn sigh, as thus he spoke:

“How oft hast thou, ill-fated, dearest friend,
Here in this tent with eager zeal prepar’d
The tempting meal, whene’er the sons of Greece
In haste would arm them for the bloody fray!
Now liest thou there, while I, for love of thee,
From food and drink, before me plac’d, refrain:
For ne’er shall I again such sorrow know,
Not though I heard of aged Peleus’ death,
Who now in Phthia mourns, with tender tears,
His absent son; he on a foreign shore
Is warring in that hateful Helen’s cause:
No, nor of his, who now in Scyros’ isle
Is growing up, if yet indeed he live,
Young Neoptolemus, my godlike son.
My hope had been indeed, that here in Troy,
Far from the plains of Argos, I alone
Was doom’d to die; and that to Phthia thou,
Return’d in safety, mightst my son convey
From Scyros home, and show him all my wealth,
My spoils, my slaves, my lofty, spacious house.
For Peleus or to death, methinks, e’en now
Hath yielded, or not far from death remov’d,
Lives on in sorrow, bow’d by gloomy age,
Expecting day by day the messenger
Who bears the mournful tidings of my death.”

Weeping, Achilles spoke; and with him wept
The Elders; each to fond remembrance mov’d
Of all that in his home himself had left.
The son of Saturn, pitying, saw their grief,
And Pallas thus with winged words address’d:
“My child, dost thou a hero’s cause forsake,
Or does Achilles claim no more thy care,
Who sits in sorrow by the high-prow’d ships,
Mourning his comrade slain? the others all
Partake the meal, while he from food abstains:
Then haste thee, and, with hunger lest he faint,
Drop nectar and ambrosia on his breast.”

His words fresh impulse gave to Pallas’ zeal:
Down, like the long-wing’d falcon, shrill of voice,
Thro’ the clear sky she swoop’d: and while the Greeks
Arm’d for the fight, Achilles she approach’d,
And nectar and ambrosia on his breast
Distill’d, lest hunger should his strength subdue;
Back to her mighty Father’s ample house
Returning, as from out the ships they pour’d.
Thick as the snow-flakes that from Heav’n descend,
Before the sky-born Boreas’ chilling blast;
So thick, outpouring from the ships, the stream
Of helmets polish’d bright, and bossy shields,
And breastplates firmly brac’d, and ashen spears:
Their brightness flash’d to Heav’n; and laugh’d the Earth
Beneath the brazen glare; loud rang the tramp
Of armed men: Achilles in the midst,
The godlike chief, in dazzling arms array’d.
His teeth were gnashing audibly; his eye
Blaz’d with, the light of fire; but in his heart
Was grief unbearable; with furious wrath
He burn’d against the Trojans, as he donn’d
The heav’nly gifts, the work of Vulcan’s hand.
First on his legs the well-wrought greaves he fix’d,
Fasten’d with silver clasps; his breastplate next
Around his chest; and o’er his shoulders flung
His silver-studded sword, with blade of brass;
Then took his vast and weighty shield, whence gleam’d
A light refulgent as the full-orb’d moon;
Or as to seamen o’er the wave is borne
The watchfire’s light, which, high among the hills,
Some shepherd kindles in his lonely fold:
As they, reluctant, by the stormy winds,
Far from their friends are o’er the waters driv’n;
So from Achilles’ shield, bright, richly wrought,
The light was thrown. The weighty helm he rais’d,
And plac’d it on his head; the plumed helm
Shone like a star; and wav’d the hairs of gold.
Thick-set by Vulcan in the gleaming crest.
Then all the arms Achilles prov’d, to know
If well they fitted to his graceful limbs:
Like wings, they seem’d to lift him from the ground.
Last, from its case he drew his father’s spear,
Long, pond’rous, tough; not one of all the Greeks,
None, save Achilles’ self, could poise that spear;
The far-fam’d Pelian ash, which to his sire,
On Pelion’s summit fell’d, to be the bane
Of mighty chiefs, the Centaur Chiron gave.
With care Automedon and Alcimus
The horses yok’d, with collars fair attach’d:
Plac’d in their mouths the bits, and pass’d the reins
Back to the well-built car: Automedon
Sprang on the car, with shining lash in hand:
Behind, Achilles came, array’d for war,
In arms all glitt’ring as the gorgeous sun,
And loudly to his father’s steeds he call’d:
“Xanthus and Balius, noble progeny
Of swift Podarge, now in other sort
Back to the Grecian ranks in safety bear,
When he shall quit the field, your charioteer;
Nor leave him, as ye left Patroclus, slain.”

To whom in answer from beneath the yoke
Xanthus, the noble horse, with glancing feet:
Bowing his head the while, till all his mane
Down from th’ yokeband streaming, reach’d the ground;
By Juno, white-arm’d Queen, with speech endued:

“Yes, great Achilles, we this day again
Will bear thee safely; but thy day of doom
Is nigh at hand; nor we shall cause thy death,
But Heav’n’s high will, and Fate’s imperious pow’r.
By no default of ours, nor lack of speed,
The Trojans stripp’d Patroclus of his arms:
The mighty God, fair-hair’d Latona’s son,
Achiev’d his death, and Hector’s vict’ry gain’d.
Our speed of foot may vie with Zephyr’s breeze,
Deem’d swiftest of the winds; but thou art doom’d
To die, by force combin’d of God and man.”

He said; his farther speech the Furies stay’d.
To whom in wrath Achilles swift of foot;
“Xanthus, why thus predict my coming fate?
It ill beseems thee! well I know myself
That I am fated here in Troy to die,
Far from my home and parents; yet withal
I cease not, till these Trojans from the field
Before me fly.” He said, and to the front,
His war-cry shouting, urg’d his fiery steeds.





Round thee, Achilles, eager for the fray,
Stood thus accoutred, by their beaked ships,
The sons of Greece; the Trojan host, oppos’d,
Stood on the sloping margin of the plain.
Then Jove to Themis gave command to call
The Gods to council from the lofty height
Of many-ridg’d Olympus; to the house
Of Jove she summon’d them from ev’ry side.
Thence of the Rivers, save Oceanus,
Not one was absent; nor of Nymphs, who haunt
Clear fount, or shady grove, or grassy mead.
They, at the Cloud-compeller’s house arriv’d,
Within the polish’d corridor reclin’d,
Which Vulcan’s cunning hand for Jove had built.
There were they gather’d in th’ abode of Jove:
Nor did th’ Earth-shaking Neptune slight the call,
But came from ocean’s depths, and in the midst
He sat, and thus the will of Jove enquir’d:

“Why, Lord of lightning, hast thou summon’d here
The Gods to council? dost thou aught devise
Touching the Greeks and Trojans? who e’en now
Kindle anew, it seems, the blaze of war.”

To whom the Cloud-compeller, answ’ring, thus:
“The purpose, Neptune, well thou know’st thyself
For which I call’d ye; true, they needs must die,
But still they claim my care; yet here will I
Upon Olympus’ lofty ridge remain,
And view, serene, the combat; you, the rest,
Go, as you list, to Trojans or to Greeks,
And at your pleasure either party aid.
For if we leave Achilles thus alone
To fight against the Trojans, not an hour
Will they before the son of Peleus stand.
They dreaded him before; but now, I fear,
Since rous’d to fury by his comrade’s death,
He e’en in fate’s despite may storm the wall.”

Thus Saturn’s son, and quenchless battle rous’d:
The Gods, divided, hasten’d to the war:
Juno and Pallas to the ships of Greece,
With them th’ Earth-shaker, and the helpful God,
Hermes, for cunning subtleties unmatch’d;
And Vulcan too, exulting in his strength,
Yet halting, and on feeble limbs sustain’d.
Mars of the glancing helm took part with Troy,
And golden Phoebus with his locks unshorn,
Latona too, and Dian, Archer-Queen,
Xanthus, and Venus, laughter-loving dame.

While from the fight of men the Gods abstain’d,
High rose the Grecian vaunts, as, long withdrawn,
Achilles on the field again appear’d:
And ev’ry Trojan’s limbs with terror quak’d,
Trembling, as Peleus’ godlike son they saw,
In arms all-glitt’ring, fierce as blood-stain’d Mars.
But when th’ Immortals mingled in the throng,
Then furious wax’d the spirit-stirring strife;
Then Pallas rais’d her war-cry, standing now
Beside the deep-dug trench, without the wall,
Now shouting loud along the sounding beach.
On th’ other side, as with the tempest’s roar,
Mars to the Trojans shouted loud; one while
From Ilium’s topmost height; anon again
From the fair hill, o’erhanging Simois’ stream.
Thus, either side exciting to the fray,
Th’ immortal Gods unchain’d the angry war.
Thunder’d on high the Sire of Gods and men
With awful din; while Neptune shook beneath
The boundless earth, and lofty mountain tops.
The spring-abounding Ida quak’d and rock’d
From her firm basis to her loftiest peak,
And Troy’s proud city, and the ships of Greece.
Pluto, th’ infernal monarch, heard alarm’d,
And, springing from his throne, cried out in fear,
Lest Neptune, breaking through the solid earth,
To mortals and Immortals should lay bare
His dark and drear abode, of Gods abhorr’d.
Such was the shock when Gods in battle met;
For there to royal Neptune stood oppos’d
Phoebus Apollo with his arrows keen;
The blue-ey’d Pallas to the God of War;
To Juno, Dian, heav’nly Archeress,
Sister of Phoebus, golden-shafted Queen.
Stout Hermes, helpful God, Latona fac’d;
While Vulcan met the mighty rolling stream,
Xanthus by Gods, by men Scamander call’d.
Thus Gods encounter’d Gods: Achilles’ soul
Meantime was burning ’mid the throng to meet
Hector, the son of Priam; with whose blood
He long’d to glut th’ insatiate Lord of War.
Apollo then, the spirit-stirring God,
Æneas mov’d Achilles to confront,
And fill’d with courage high; and thus, the voice
Assuming of Lycaon, Priam’s son,
Apollo, son of Jove, the chief address’d:

“Æneas, prince and councillor of Troy,
Where are the vaunts, which o’er the wine-cup late
Thou mad’st amid th’ assembled chiefs of Troy,
That hand to hand thou wouldst Achilles meet?”

To whom Æneas thus in answer spoke:
“Why, son of Priam, urge me to contend,
Against my will, with Peleus’ mighty son?
Not for the first time should I now engage
Achilles swift of foot: I met him once,
And fled before his spear, on Ida’s hill,
When on our herds he fell; Lyrnessus then
He raz’d, and Pedasus; me Jove preserv’d,
With strength, endowing, and with speed of foot.
Else had I fall’n beneath Achilles’ hand,
By Pallas aided; who before him moves,
Light of his life, and guides his brazen spear
Trojans and Leleges alike to slay.
’Tis not in mortal man with him to fight,
Whom still some God attends, and guards from harm;
And, e’en unaided, to the mark his spear
Unerring flies, uncheck’d until it pierce
A warrior’s breast; yet if the Gods the scale
Impartial held, all brass-clad as he is,
O’er me no easy triumph should he gain.”

To whom the King Apollo, son of Jove:
“Brave chief, do thou too to th’ immortal Gods
Address thy pray’r; men say that thou art sprung
From Venus, child of Jove; his mother owns
A humbler origin; one born to Jove,
The other to the aged Ocean God.
On then with dauntless spear, nor be dismay’d
By his high tone and vaunting menaces.”

His words with courage fill’d the hero’s breast,
And on he sprang, in dazzling arms arrayed;
But not unmark’d of white-arm’d Juno pass’d,
To meet Achilles, through the press of men,
Who thus address’d the Gods, to council call’d:

“Neptune and Pallas both, bethink ye well
What now should be our course; Æneas comes,
In dazzling arms array’d, to meet in fight
The son of Peleus; Phoebus sends him forth.
Say, then, shall we, encount’ring, to retreat
Perforce constrain him? or shall one of us
Beside Achilles stand, and give him strength
That he may nothing lack; and know himself
By all the mightiest of th’ immortal Gods
Belov’d, and those how pow’rless, by whose aid
The Trojans yet maintain defensive war?
Therefore, to join the battle, came we all
From high Olympus, that in this day’s fight
No ill befall him; though the time shall come
For him to meet the doom, by fate decreed,
When at his birth his thread of life was spun.
But if Achilles from a voice divine
Receive not this assurance, he may well
Be struck with fear, if haply to some God
He find himself oppos’d: ’tis hard for man
To meet, in presence visible, a God.”

To whom Earth-shaking Neptune thus replied:
“Juno, thine anger carry not too far;
It ill beseems thee. Not with my consent
Shall we, the stronger far, provoke to arms
The other Gods; but rather, from the field
Retiring, let us from on high survey,
To mortals left, the turmoil of the war.
Should Mars or Phoebus then begin the fight,
Or stay Achilles, and his arm restrain,
Then in the contest we too may engage;
And soon, methinks, will they be fain to join,
Driv’n from the field, the Synod of the Gods,
Subdued perforce by our victorious hands.”

The dark-hair’d monarch spoke; and led the way
To the high wall, by Trojans built of old,
With Pallas’ aid, for godlike Hercules;
Within whose circle he might safety seek,
When from the beach the monster of the deep
Might chase him toward the plain; there Neptune sat,
And with him, the other Gods, a veil of cloud
Impenetrable around their shoulders spread.
On th’ other side, upon the fair hill’s brow,
Phoebus with Mars the fort-destroyer sat.
On either side they sat, each facing each
With hostile counsels; yet reluctant both
To take th’ initiative of ruthless war;
Till Jove, enthron’d on high, the signal gave.
Then all the plain, with men and horses throng’d,
The brazen gleam illumin’d; rang the earth
Beneath their feet, as to the battle-shock
They rush’d; but in the midst, both hosts between,
Eager for fight, stood forth two warriors bold,
Proudly pre-eminent; Anchises’ son
Æneas, and Achilles’ godlike might.

Æneas first with threat’ning mien advanc’d,
Nodding his pond’rous helm; before his breast
His shield he bore, and pois’d his brazen spear.
Him met Achilles from th’ opposing ranks;
Fierce as a rav’ning lion, whom to slay
Pour forth the stalwart youths, th’ united strength
Of the rous’d village; he unheeding moves
At first; but wounded by a jav’lin thrown
By some bold youth, he turns, with gaping jaws,
And frothing fangs, collecting for the spring,
His breast too narrow for his mighty heart;
And with his tail he lashes both his flanks
And sides, as though to rouse his utmost rage;
Then on, in pride of strength, with glaring eyes
He dashes, if some hunter he may slay,
Or in the foremost rank himself be slain.
So mov’d his dauntless spirit Peleus’ son
Æneas to confront; when near they came,
Thus first Achilles, swift of foot, began:

“Æneas, why so far before the ranks
Advanc’d? dost thou presume with me to fight?
Perchance expecting that the throne of Troy
And Priam’s royal honours may be thine.
E’en if thou slay me, deem not to obtain
Such boon from Priam; valiant sons are his,
And he not weak, but bears a constant mind.
Or have the Trojans set apart for thee
Some favour’d spot, the fairest of the land,
Orchard or corn-land, shouldst thou work my death;
Which thou shalt find, I trust, too hard a task?
Already hast thou fled before my spear;
Hast thou forgotten how amid thy herds
Alone I found thee, and with flying foot
Pursued thee down the steep of Ida’s hill?
Nor didst thou dare to turn, or pause in flight.
Thou to Lyrnessus fledd’st; Lyrnessus I,
With Pallas’ aid and Jove’s, assail’d and took:
Their women thence, their days of freedom lost,
I bore away, my captives; thee from death,
Jove and the other Gods defended then;
But will not now bestow, though such thy hope,
Their succour; then I warn thee, while ’tis time,
Ere ill betide thee, to the gen’ral throng
That thou withdraw, nor stand to me oppos’d:
After th’ event may e’en a fool be wise.”

To whom in answer thus Æneas spoke:
“Achilles, think not me, as though a fool,
To daunt with lofty speech; I too could well
With cutting words, and insult, answer thee.
Each other’s race and parents well we know
From tales of ancient days; although by sight
Nor mine to thee, nor thine to me are known.
To noble Peleus thou, ’tis said, wast born
Of Thetis, fair-hair’d daughter of the sea;
Of great Anchises, Heav’n-descended chief,
I boast me sprung, to him by Venus borne.
Of these shall one or other have this day
To mourn their son; since not with empty words
Shall thou and I from mortal combat part.
But if thou farther wouldst enquire, and learn
The race I spring from, not unknown to men,
By Dardanus, of cloud-compelling Jove
Begotten, was Dardania peopled first,
Ere sacred Ilium, populous city of men,
Was founded on the plain; as yet they dwelt
On spring-abounding Ida’s lowest spurs.
To Dardanus was Erichthonius born,
Great King, the wealthiest of the sons of men;
For him were pastur’d in the marshy mead,
Rejoicing with their foals, three thousand mares;
Them Boreas, in the pasture where they fed,
Beheld, enamour’d; and amid the herd
In likeness of a coal-black steed appear’d;
Twelve foals, by him conceiving, they produc’d.
These, o’er the teeming corn-fields as they flew,
Skimm’d o’er the standing ears, nor broke the haulm;
And, o’er wide Ocean’s bosom as they flew,
Skimm’d o’er the topmost spray of th’ hoary sea
Again, to Erichthonius Tros was born,
The King of Troy; three noble sons were his,
Ilus, Assaracus, and Ganymede;
The fairest he of all the sons of men;
Him, for his beauty, bore the Gods away,
To minister as cup-bearer to Jove,
And dwell amid th’ Immortals: Ilus next
Begot a noble son, Laomedon;
Tithonus he, and Priam; Clytius,
Lampus and Icetaon, plant of Mars;
Capys, begotten of Assaracus,
Begot Anchises, and Anchises me:
To Priam godlike Hector owes his birth.
Such is my race, and such the blood I boast;
But Jove, at will, to mortals valour gives
Or minishes; for he is Lord of all.
Then cease we now, like babbling fools, to prate
Here in the centre of the coming fight.
Terms of reproach we both might find, whose weight
Would sink a galley of a hundred oars;
For glibly runs the tongue, and can at will
Give utt’rance to discourse in ev’ry vein;
Wide is the range of language; and such words
As one may speak, another may return.
What need that we should insults interchange?
Like women, who some paltry quarrel wage,
Scolding and brawling in the public street,
And in opprobrious terms their anger vent,
Some true, some false; for so their rage suggests.
With words thou shalt not turn me from the field,
Till we have met in arms; then try we now
Each other’s prowess with our brazen spears.”

He said, and hurl’d against the mighty shield
His brazen spear; loud rang the weapon’s point;
And at arm’s length Achilles held the shield
With his broad hand, in fear that through its folds
Æneas’ spear would easy passage find;
Blind fool! forgetful that the glorious gifts
Bestow’d by Gods, are not with ease o’ercome,
Nor yield before th’ assaults of mortal men.

So broke not through Æneas’ sturdy spear,
Stay’d by the golden plate, the gift of Heav’n;
Yet through two plates it pass’d, but three remain’d,
For five were in the shield by Vulcan wrought;
Two were of brass, the inner two of tin,
And one of gold, which stay’d the brazen spear.

Achilles threw in turn his pond’rous spear.
And struck the circle of Æneas’ shield
Near the first rim, where thinnest lay the brass,
And thinnest too th’ o’erlying hide; right through
The Pelian shaft was driv’n; wide gap’d the shield.
Æneas crouch’d, in fear, as o’er his head
He held his shield; the eager weapon pass’d
Through both the circles of his ample shield,
And in the ground, behind him, quiv’ring, stood.
Escap’d the pond’rous weapon, sharpest pain
Flashing across his eyes, in fear he stood,
So close the spear had pass’d him; onward then,
Drawing his trenchant blade, Achilles rush’d,
With fearful shout; a rocky fragment then
Æneas lifted up, a mighty mass,
Which scarce two men, as men are now, could bear,
But he, unaided, lifted it with ease.
Then had Æneas, with the massive stone,
Or on the helmet, or the shield, his death
Averting, struck Achilles; and himself
Had by the sword of Peleus’ son been slain,
Had not th’ Earth-shaking God his peril seen,
And to th’ Immortals thus address’d his speech:
“Oh, woe is me for great Æneas’ sake,
Who, by Achilles slain, must visit soon
The viewless shades; insensate, who relied
On Phoebus’ words; yet nought shall he avail
From death to save him. Yet oh why should he,
Blameless himself, the guilt of others rue?
Who still his grateful sacrifice hath paid
To all the Gods in wide-spread Heav’n who dwell.
Let us then interpose to guard his life;
Lest, if Achilles slay him, Saturn’s son
Be mov’d to anger; for his destiny
Would have him live; lest, heirless, from the earth
Should perish quite the race of Dardanus;
By Saturn’s son the best-belov’d of all
His sons, to him by mortal women born.
For Jove the race of Priam hath abhorr’d;
But o’er the Trojans shall Æneas reign,
And his sons’ sons, through ages yet unborn.”

Whom answer’d thus the stag-ey’d Queen of Heav’n:
“Neptune, do thou determine for thyself
Æneas to withdraw, or leave to fall,
Good as he is, beneath Achilles’ sword;
But we before th’ immortal Gods are bound,
Both I and Pallas, by repeated oaths,
Ne’er from his doom one Trojan life to save,
Though to devouring flames a prey, all Troy
Were blazing, kindled by the valiant Greeks.”

Th’ Earth-shaker heard; and thro’ the fight he pass’d,
And through the throng of spears, until he came
Where great Achilles and Æneas stood.
Around the eyes of Peleus’ son he spread
A veil of mist; then from Æneas’ shield
The brass-tipp’d spear withdrawing, laid it down
Before Achilles’ feet; and lifting up
Æneas, bore him high above the ground.
O’er many a rank of warriors and of cars
Æneas flew, supported by the God;
Till to the field’s extremest verge he came,
Where stood the Caucons, arming for the war.
There to Æneas, standing by his side,
Th’ Earth-shaker thus his winged words address’d:
“Æneas, say what God has mov’d thee thus
Against Achilles, reckless, to contend,
Thy stronger far, and dearer to the Gods?
If e’er he cross thy path, do thou retire,
Lest, e’en despite of fate, thou find thy death.
But when Achilles hath to fate succumb’d,
Then, fearless, with the foremost join the fray:
No other Greek shall bear away thy spoils.”

Thus plainly warn’d, Æneas there he left.
Then from Achilles’ eyes he purg’d the film:
Astonish’d, he with eyes wide open gaz’d,
As thus he commun’d with his mighty heart:

“O Heav’n, what marvel do mine eyes behold?
My spear before me laid, and vanish’d he
At whom I hurl’d it with intent to slay!
Then is Æneas of th’ immortal Gods
In truth belov’d, though vain I deem’d his boast.
A curse go with him! yet methinks not soon
Will he again presume to prove my might,
Who gladly now in flight escapes from death.
Then, to the valiant Greeks my orders giv’n.
Let me some other Trojan’s mettle prove.”
Then tow’rd the ranks he sprang, each sev’ral man
Exhorting: “From the Trojans, valiant Greeks,
No longer stand aloof; but man to man
Confront the foe, and nobly dare the fight.
’Twere hard for me, brave warrior though I be,
To face such numbers, and to fight with all:
Not Mars, nor Pallas, though immortal Gods,
Could face, and vanquish, such a mighty mass.
But what my single arm, and feet, and strength
May profit, not a jot will I relax;
Right through the ranks I mean to force my way;
And small shall be that Trojan’s cause for joy,
Who comes within the compass of my spear.”

Thus he, exhorting; Hector cheering on
Meanwhile the Trojans, with assurance giv’n
That he himself Achilles would confront.

“Ye valiant Trojans, fear not Peleus’ son;
I too in words could with the Gods contend,
Though not in arms; so much the stronger they.
Not all his words Achilles shall make good;
Fulfilling some, in others he shall fail,
His course midway arrested. Him will I
Encounter, though his hands were hands of fire,
Of fire his hands, his strength as burnish’d steel.”

Thus he, exhorting; with uplifted spears
Advanc’d the Trojans; from the mingling hosts
Loud rose the clamour; then at Hector’s side
Apollo stood, and thus address’d the chief:
“Hector, forbear Achilles to defy;
And ’mid the crowd withdraw thee from the fray;
Lest with the spear he slay thee, thrown from far,
Or with the sword in combat hand to hand.”

He said; and troubled by the heav’nly voice,
Hector amid the throng of men withdrew.

Then, girt with might, amid the Trojans sprang,
With fearful shouts, Achilles; first he slew
Otryntes’ son, Iphition, valiant chief
Of num’rous warriors; him a Naiad nymph,
In Hyde’s fertile vale, beneath the feet
Of snow-clad Tmolus, to Otryntes bore;
At him, as on he rush’d, Achilles hurl’d,
And through his forehead drove his glitt’ring spear;
The head was cleft in twain; thund’ring he fell,
And o’er him thus Achilles made his boast:

“Son of Otryntes, lie thou there, of men
The most vain-glorious; here thou find’st thy death,
Far from thy place of birth, beside the lake
Gygaean; there hadst thou thine heritage
Of old, beside the fish-abounding stream
Of Hyllus, and by Hermus’ eddying flood.”

Thus he, exulting: o’er Iphition’s eyes
Were spread the shades of death; his mangled corpse
Was crush’d beneath the Grecian chariot wheels,
In the first shock. Demoleon next he smote,
A helpful aid in war, Antenor’s son,
Pierc’d thro’ the temples, thro’ the brass-bound helm;
Nor check’d the brazen helm the spear, whose point
Went crashing through the bone, that all the brain
Was shatter’d; onward as he rush’d, he fell.
Then through the neck Hippodamas he smote,
Flying before him, mounted on his car.
Deep groan’d he, breathing out his soul, as groans
A bull, by sturdy youths to th’ altar dragg’d
Of Neptune, King divine of Helice;
Th’ Earth-shaking God, well pleas’d, the gift receives;
E’en with such groans his noble spirit fled.
The godlike Polydore he next assail’d,
The son of Priam; him his aged sire
Would fain have kept at home, of all his sons
At once the youngest and the best-belov’d;
Among them all for speed of foot unmatch’d;
Whose youthful folly, in the foremost ranks
His speed displaying, cost him now his life.
Him, as he darted by, Achilles’ spear
Struck through the centre of the back, where met
The golden clasps that held the glitt’ring belt,
And where the breastplate form’d a double guard:
Right through his body pass’d the weapon’s point;
Groaning, he fell upon his knees; dark clouds
O’erspread his eyes; supporting with his hand
His wounded bowels, on the ground he writh’d.
When Hector saw his brother Polydore
Writhing in death, a mist o’erspread his eyes
Nor longer could he bear to stand aloof,
But sprang to meet Achilles, flashing fire,
His keen spear brandishing; at sight of him
Up leap’d Achilles, and exulting cried:

“Lo, here the man who most hath wrung my soul,
Who slew my lov’d companion: now, methinks,
Upon the pass of war not long shall we
Stand separate, nor each the other shun.”

Then, with stern glance, to godlike Hector thus:
“Draw near, and quickly meet thy doom of death.”

To whom thus Hector of the glancing helm,
Unterrified: “Achilles, think not me,
As though a fool and ignorant of war,
To daunt with lofty speech; I too could well
With cutting words and insult answer thee.
I know thee strong and valiant; and I know
Myself to thee inferior; but th’ event
Is with the Gods; and I, if such their will,
The weaker, with my spear may reach thy life:
My point too hath, ere now, its sharpness prov’d.”

He said, and, poising, hurl’d his pond’rous spear,
Which from Achilles Pallas turn’d aside
With lightest breath; and back to Hector sent,
And laid before his feet; intent to slay,
Onward Achilles rush’d, with fearful shout;
But Phoebus Hector from the field convey’d,
(As Gods can only,) veil’d in thickest cloud.
Thrice Peleus’ godlike son, with brazen spear,
His onset made; thrice struck the misty cloud;
But when, with pow’r as of a God, he made
His fourth essay, in fury thus he cried:

“Yet once again, vile hound, hast thou escap’d;
Thy doom was nigh, but thee thy God hath sav’d,
Phoebus, to whom, amid the clash of spears,
Well mayst thou pray! We yet shall meet again;
When I shall end thee, if a guardian God
I too may claim; meanwhile, from thee I turn,
And others seek on whom my hap may light.”

He said, and drove through Dryops’ neck his spear,
And stretch’d him at his feet, and pass’d him by.
Next with his spear he struck below the knee
Philetor’s son, Demuchus, stout and tall,
And check’d his forward course; then rushing on
Dealt with his mighty sword the mortal blow.
The sons of Bias next, Laogonus
And Dardanus, he hurl’d from off their car,
One with the spear, and one by sword-stroke slain.
Tros too he slew, Alastor’s son, who came
To meet him, and embrace his knees, and pray
To spare his life, in pity of his youth:
Little he knew how vain would be his pray’r;
For not of temper soft, nor mild of mood
Was he, but sternly fierce; and as he knelt
And clasp’d his knees, and would his pray’r prefer,
Achilles clove him with his mighty sword,
Gash’d through the liver; as from out the wound
His liver dropp’d, the dark blood gushing forth
His bosom fill’d, and darkness clos’d his eyes,
As ebb’d his life away. Then through the ear
Mulius he thrust; at th’ other ear came forth
The brazen point. Echeclus next he met,
Son of Agenor, and his hilted sword
Full on the centre of his head let fall.
The hot blood dy’d the blade; the darkling shades
Of death, and rig’rous fate, his eyes o’erspread.
Next, where the tendons bind the elbow-joint,
The brazen spear transfix’d Deucalion’s arm;
With death in prospect, and disabled arm
He stood, till on his neck Achilles’ sword
Descending, shar’d, and flung afar, both head
And helmet; from the spine’s dissever’d joints
The marrow flow’d, as stretch’d in dust he lay.
The noble son of Peireus next he slew,
Rigmus, who came from Thracia’s fertile plains;
Him through the waist he struck, the brazen spear
Plung’d in his bowels; from the car he fell;
And as Areithous, his charioteer,
His horses turn’d, Achilles through the neck
His sharp spear thrusting, hurl’d him to the ground,
The startled steeds in wild confusion thrown.

As rage the fires amid the wooded glen
Of some parch’d mountain’s side, and fiercely burns
The copse-wood dry, while eddying here and there
The flames are whirl’d before the gusty wind;
So fierce Achilles raged, on ev’ry side
Pursuing, slaught’ring; reek’d the earth with blood.
As when upon a well-roll’d threshing-floor,
Two sturdy-fronted steers, together yok’d,
Tread the white barley out; beneath their feet
Fast flies the grain out-trodden from the husk;
So by Achilles driv’n, his flying steeds
His chariot bore, o’er bodies of the slain
And broken bucklers trampling; all beneath
Was plash’d with blood the axle, and the rails
Around the car, as from the horses’ feet
And from the felloes of the wheels were thrown
The bloody gouts; and onward still he press’d,
Panting for added triumphs, deeply dyed
With gore and carnage his unconquer’d hands.





But when they came to eddying Xanthus’ ford,
Fair-flowing stream, born of immortal Jove,
Achilles cut in twain the flying host;
Part driving tow’rd the city, o’er the plain,
Where on the former day the routed Greeks,
When Hector rag’d victorious, fled amain.
On, terror-struck, they rush’d; but Juno spread,
To baffle their retreat, before their path,
Clouds and thick darkness: half the fugitives
In the deep river’s silv’ry eddies plung’d:
With clamour loud they fell: the torrent roar’d;
The banks around re-echoed; here and there,
They, with the eddies wildly struggling, swam.
As when, pursued by fire, a hov’ring swarm
Of locusts riverward direct their flight,
And, as th’ insatiate flames advance, they cow’r
Amid the waters; so a mingled mass
Of men and horses, by Achilles driv’n,
The deeply-whirling stream, of Xanthus chok’d.
His spear amid the tamarisks on the bank
The hero left; on savage deeds intent,
Arm’d with his sword alone, a God in pow’r,
He sprang amid the torrent; right and left
He smote; then fearful rose the groans of men
Slain with the sword; the stream ran red with blood.
As fishes, flying from a dolphin, crowd
The shoal recesses of some open bay,
In fear, for whom he catches he devours;
So crouch’d the Trojans in the mighty stream
Beneath the banks; and when at length his hand
Wearied of slaughter, from the stream, alive,
He dragg’d twelve youths, whose forfeit lives should be
The bloody fine for slain Patroclus paid.
Helpless from fear, as fawns, he brought them forth;
Their hands secur’d behind them with the belts
Which o’er their shirts of twisted mail they wore,
And bade his comrades lead them to the ships.
Then on again he dash’d, athirst for blood;
And first encounter’d, flying from the stream,
Lycaon, Priam’s son; him once before
He by a nightly onslaught had surpris’d,
And from his father’s vineyard captive borne:
Where, as he cut, to form his chariot rail,
A fig-tree’s tender shoots, unlook’d-for ill
O’ertook him in the form of Peleus’ son.
Thence in his ship to Lemnos’ thriving isle
He bore him, ransom’d there by Jason’s son.
His Imbrian host, Eetion, set him free
With lib’ral gifts, and to Arisba sent:
Escaping thence, he reach’d his native home.
Twelve days save one, rejoicing, with his friends
He spent, return’d from Lemnos: fate, the twelfth,
Again consign’d him to Achilles’ hands,
From him, reluctant, to receive his death.
Him when Achilles, swift of foot, beheld,
No spear in hand, of helm and shield bereft,
All flung in haste away, as from the stream,
Reeking with sweat, and faint with toil, he fled,
He commun’d, wrathful, with his mighty heart:

“Ye Gods, what marvel do mine eyes behold!
Methinks the valiant Trojans slain by me
Ere long will from the realms of darkness rise;
Since, death escaping, but to slav’ry sold
In Lemnos’ isle, this fellow hath return’d,
Despite the hoary sea’s impediment,
Which many a man against his will hath stay’d:
Now shall he taste my spear, that I may see
If thence too he return, or if the earth
May keep him safe, which e’en the strongest holds.”

Thus, as he stood, he mus’d; but all aghast
Approach’d Lycaon; and would fain have clasp’d
The Hero’s knees; for longingly he sought
Escape from bitter death and evil fate.
Achilles rais’d his spear, in act to strike;
He, stooping, ran beneath, and clasp’d his knees;
Above his back the murd’rous weapon pass’d,
And in the earth was fix’d: one suppliant hand
Achilles’ knees embrac’d; the other held,
With unrelaxing grasp, the pointed spear;
As he with winged words, imploring, spoke:

“I clasp thy knees, Achilles! look then down
With pity on my woes; and recognize,
Illustrious chief, a suppliant’s sacred claim:
For in thy tent I first broke bread, that day,
When, in my father’s fruitful vineyard seiz’d,
Thy captive I became, to slav’ry sold,
Far from my sire and friends, in Lemnos’ isle.
A hundred oxen were my ransom then;
At thrice so much I now would buy my life.
This day is but the twelfth, since, sorely tried
By lengthen’d suffering, back to Troy I came.
Now to thy hands once more my cruel fate
Consigns me; surely by the wrath of Jove
Pursued, who gives me to thy pow’r again.
Me, doom’d to early death, my mother bore,
Old Altes’ daughter, fair Laothoe;
Altes, who rul’d the warlike Leleges,
In lofty Pedasus, by Satnois’ stream.
His child of Priam’s many wives was one;
Two sons she bore, and both by thee must die.
Already one, the godlike Polydore,
Amid the foremost ranks thy spear hath slain;
And now my doom hath found me; for from thee,
Since evil fate hath plac’d me in thy hands,
I may not hope to fly; yet hear but this,
And weigh it in thy mind, to spare my life:
I come not of that womb which Hector bore,
Who slew thy comrade, gentle, kind, and brave.”

Thus Priam’s noble son, imploring, spoke;
But stern the answer fell upon his ear:

“Thou fool! no more to me of ransom prate!
Before Patroclus met the doom of death,
To spare the Trojans still my soul inclin’d;
And many captives, ta’en alive, I sold;
But from henceforth, before the walls of Troy,
Not one of all the Trojans, whom the Gods
May to my hands deliver, least of all
A son of Priam, shall escape the death.
Thou too, my friend, must die: why vainly wail?
Dead is Patroclus too, thy better far.
Me too thou see’st, how stalwart, tall, and fair,
Of noble sire, and Goddess-mother born:
Yet must I yield to death and stubborn fate,
Whene’er, at morn, or noon, or eve, the spear
Or arrow from the bow may reach my life.”

He said; and sank Lycaon’s limbs and heart;
He loos’d the spear, and sat, with both his hands
Uprais’d, imploring; but Achilles drew,
And on his neck beside the collar-bone
Let fall his trenchant sword; the two-edg’d blade
Was buried deep; prone on the earth he lay;
Forth gush’d the crimson blood, and dyed the ground.

Him, dragging by the feet, Achilles threw
In the mid stream, and thus with vaunting speech:

“Lie there amid the fishes, who shall cleanse,
But not with kindly thought, thy gory wounds:
O’er thee, extended on thy bier, shall rise
No mother’s wail; Scamander’s eddying stream
Shall to the sea’s broad bosom roll thee down;
And, springing through the darkly rippling wave,
Fishes shall rise, and banquet on thy flesh.
On now the work of death! till, flying ye,
And slaught’ring I, we reach the city wall.
Nor this fair-flowing, silver-eddying stream,
Shall aught avail ye, though to him ye pay
In sacrifice the blood of countless bulls,
And living horses in his waters sink.
Ye all shall perish, till Patroclus’ death
Be fully aveng’d, and slaughter of the Greeks,
Whom, in my absence, by the ships ye slew.”
He said: the mighty River at his words
Indignant chaf’d, and ponder’d in his mind
How best to check Achilles’ warlike toil,
And from destruction guard the Trojan host.

Meantime Achilles with his pond’rous spear
Asteropaeus, son of Pelegon,
Assail’d with deadly purpose; Pelegon
To broadly-flowing Axius ow’d his birth,
The River-God commingling with the blood
Of Periboea, daughter eldest born
Of Acessamenus: on him he sprang;
He, from the river rising, stood oppos’d.
Two lances in his hand; his courage rous’d
By Xanthus, who, indignant, saw his stream
Polluted by the blood of slaughter’d youths,
By fierce Achilles’ hand, unpitying, slain.
When near the warriors, each to other, came,
Achilles, swift of foot, took up the word:
“What man, and whence art thou, who dar’st to stand
Oppos’d to me? of most unhappy sires
The children they, who my encounter meet!”

To whom th’ illustrious son of Pelegon:
“Great son of Peleus, why enquire my race?
From far Paeonia’s fertile fields I come,
The leader of the long-spear’d Paeon host.
Ten days have pass’d since I to Ilium came.
From widely-flowing Axius my descent,
Axius, the purest stream on earth that flows.
He Pelegon begot, the spear-renown’d;
Of Pelegon I boast me sprung; and now
Address thee, brave Achilles, to the fight.”

Threat’ning he spoke: Achilles rais’d on high
The Pelian spear; but, ambidexter, he
From either hand at once a jav’lin launch’d.
One struck, but pierc’d not through, the mighty shield,
Stay’d by the golden plate, the gift of Heav’n;
Achilles’ right fore-arm the other graz’d:
Forth gush’d the crimson blood; but, glancing by
And vainly longing for the taste of flesh,
The point behind him in the earth was fix’d.
Then at Asteropaeus in his turn
With deadly intent the son of Peleus threw
His straight-directed spear; his mark he miss’d,
But struck the lofty bank, where, deep infix’d
To half its length, the Pelian ash remain’d.
Then from beside his thigh Achilles drew
His trenchant blade, and, furious, onward rush’d;
While from the cliff Asteropaeus strove
In vain, with stalwart hand, to wrench the spear.
Three times he shook it with impetuous force,
Three times relax’d his grasp; a fourth attempt
He made to bend and break the sturdy shaft;
But him, preventing, Peleus’ godlike son
With deadly stroke across the belly smote,
And gush’d his bowels forth; upon the ground
Gasping he lay, and darkness seal’d his eyes.
Then on his breast Achilles sprang, and stripp’d
His armour off, and thus with vaunting speech:
“So lie thou there! ’tis hard for thee to fight,
Though river-born, against the progeny
Of mighty Jove; a widely-flowing stream
Thou claim’st as author of thy parentage;
My high descent from Jove himself I boast.
My father Peleus, son of Æacus,
Reigns o’er the num’rous race of Myrmidons;
The son of Jove himself was Æacus.
High o’er all rivers, that to th’ ocean flow,
Is Jove exalted; and in like degree
Superior is his race in pow’r to theirs.
A mighty River hast thou here at hand,
If that might aught avail thee; but his pow’r
Is impotent to strive with Saturn’s son.
With him, not Achelous, King of streams,
Presumes to vie; nor e’en the mighty strength
Of deeply-flowing, wide Oceanus;
From whom all rivers, all the boundless sea,
All fountains, all deep wells derive their source;
Yet him appals the lightning bolt of Jove,
And thunder, pealing from the vault of Heav’n.”
He said, and from the cliff withdrew his spear.
Him left he lifeless there upon the sand
Extended; o’er him the dark waters wash’d,
And eels and fishes, thronging, gnaw’d his flesh.
Then ’mid the Paeons’ plumed host he rush’d,
Who fled along the eddying stream, when him,
Their bravest in the stubborn fight, they saw
Slain by the sword and arm of Peleus’ son.
Thersilochus and Mydon then he slew,
Mnesus and Thrasius and Astypylus,
Ænius and Ophelestes; and yet more
Had been the slaughter by Achilles wrought,
But from his eddying depths, in human form,
With wrathful tone the mighty River spoke:

“In strength, Achilles, and in deeds of arms,
All mortals thou surpassest; for the Gods
Themselves attend thee, and protect from harm;
If Saturn’s son have given thee utterly
The Trojans to destroy, yet, ere thou slay,
Far from my waters drive them o’er the plain;
For now my lovely stream is fill’d with dead;
Nor can I pour my current to the sea,
With floating corpses chok’d, whilst thou pursuest
The work of death, insatiate: stay thy hand!
With horror I behold thee, mighty chief!”

Whom answer’d thus Achilles, swift of foot:
“Be it as thou wilt, Scamander, Heav’n-born stream;
Yet cease I not to slay until I drive
These vaunting Trojans to their walls, and prove
The force of Hector, if, in single fight,
I be by him, or he by me, subdued.”

He said, and fiercely on the Trojans rush’d,
A God in might! to Phoebus then his speech
The deeply-eddying River thus address’d:

“God of the silver bow, great son of Jove,
Obey’st thou thus the will of Saturn’s son,
Who charg’d thee by the Trojans still to stand,
And aid their cause, till ev’ning’s late approach
Should cast its shadows o’er the fertile earth?”

Thus as he spoke, from off the lofty bank
Achilles springing in mid current plung’d;
Then high the swelling stream, tumultuous, rose
In all its angry flood; and with a roar
As of a bellowing bull, cast forth to land
The num’rous corpses by Achilles slain;
And many living, in his cavern’d bed,
Conceal’d behind the whirling waters sav’d.
Fierce, round Achilles, rose the boiling wave,
And on his shield descending, drove him down;
Nor might he keep his foothold; but he grasp’d
A lofty elm, well-grown, which from the cliff
Uprooted, all the bank had torn away,
And with its tangled branches check’d the flow
Of the fair river, which with all its length
It bridg’d across; then, springing from the deep,
Swiftly he fled in terror o’er the plain.
Nor ceas’d the mighty River, but pursued,
With darkly-ruffling crest, intent to stay
Achilles’ course, and save the Trojan host.
Far as a jav’lin’s flight he rush’d, in speed
Like the dark hunter eagle, strongest deem’d,
And swiftest wing’d of all the feather’d race.
So on he sped; loud rattled on his breast
His brazen armour, as before the God,
Cow’ring, he fled; the God behind him still
With thund’ring sound pursued. As when a man
From some dark-water’d spring through trenches leads,
’Mid plants and gardens, th’ irrigating stream,
And, spade in hand, th’ appointed channel clears:
Down flows the stream anon, its pebbly bed
Disturbing; fast it flows with bubbling sound,
Down the steep slope, o’ertaking him who leads.
Achilles so th’ advancing wave o’ertook,
Though great his speed; but man must yield to Gods,
Oft as Achilles, swift of foot, essay’d
To turn and stand, and know if all the Gods,
Who dwell in Heav’n, were leagued to daunt his soul
So oft the Heav’n-born River’s mighty wave
Above his shoulders dash’d; in deep distress
He sprang on high; then rush’d the flood below,
And bore him off his legs, and wore away
The soil beneath his feet; then, groaning, thus,
As up to Heav’n he look’d, Achilles cried:
“O Father Jove, will none of all the Gods
In pity save me from this angry flood?
Content, thereafter, would I meet my fate.
Of all the pow’rs of Heav’n, my mother most
Hath wrong’d me, who hath buoy’d me up with hope
Delusive, that, before the walls of Troy,
I should by Phoebus’ swift-wing’d arrows fall.
Would that by Hector’s hand ’twere mine to die,
The bravest of their brave! a warrior so
Were by a warrior slain! now am I doom’d
Ignobly here to sink, the mighty flood
O’erwhelming me, like some poor shepherd lad,
Borne down in crossing by a wintry brook.”

He said; and quickly, cloth’d in mortal form,
Neptune and Pallas at his side appear’d;
With cheering words they took him by the hand,
And thus th’ Earth-shaking God his speech began:

“Achilles, fear not thou, nor be dismay’d;
Such pow’rful aid, by Jove’s consent, we bring,
Pallas and I, from Heav’n; ’tis not decreed
That thou shouldst by the River be o’erwhelm’d;
He shall retire ere long, and thou shalt see;
And more, if thou wilt hear, we undertake
That from the war thine arm shall not be stay’d,
Till thou shalt drive beneath the walls of Troy
The crowd of flying Trojans; thou thyself
Shalt Hector slay, and safe regain the ships:
Such high renown we give thee to achieve.”

They to the other Gods, this said, return’d;
He, greatly strengthen’d by the voice divine,
Press’d onwards to the plain; the plain he found
All flooded o’er; and, floating, armour fair,
And many a corpse of men in battle slain;
Yet onward, lifting high his feet, he press’d
Right tow’rd the stream; nor could the mighty stream
Check his advance, such vigour Pallas gave;
Nor did Scamander yet his fury stay,
But fiercer rose his rage; and rearing high
His crested wave, to Simois thus he cried:

“Dear brother, aid me with united force
This mortal’s course to check; he, unrestrain’d,
Will royal Priam’s city soon destroy,
Nor will the Trojans his assault endure.
Haste to the rescue then, and from their source
Fill all thy stream, and all thy channels swell;
Rouse thy big waves, and roll a torrent down
Of logs and stones, to whelm this man of might,
Who triumphs now, and bears him as a God.
Nought shall his strength or beauty then avail,
Or gallant arms, beneath the waters sunk,
Deep buried in the mud: himself will I
In sand imbed, and o’er his corpse a pile
Of shingly gravel heap; nor shall the Greeks
Be able to collect his bones, encas’d
By me so deep in slime. His monument
They here may raise; but when they celebrate
His fun’ral rites, no mound will he require.”

He said; and on Achilles, from on high
Came boiling, rushing down, with thund’ring roar,
With foam and blood and corpses intermix’d.
High rose the Heav’n-born River’s darkling wave,
And bore Achilles downward; then in fear
Lest the broad waters of the eddying stream
Should quite o’erwhelm him, Juno cried aloud,
And Vulcan thus, her son, in haste address’d:

“Up, Vulcan; up, my son; for we had deem’d
That eddying Xanthus stood to thee oppos’d:
Haste thee to aid; thy fiery strength display;
While from the sea I call the stormy blast
Of Zephyr and brisk Notus, who shall drive
The raging flames ahead, and burn alike
The Trojans and their arms: do thou the while
Burn down the trees on Xanthus’ banks; himself
Assail with fire, nor by his honey’d words
Nor by his menaces be turn’d aside;
Nor, till thou hear my voice, restrain thy pow’r;
Then stay the raging flames’ unwearied course.”

Thus Juno spoke; and Vulcan straight prepar’d
The heav’nly fire; and first upon the plain
The flames he kindled, and the dead consum’d,
Who lay, promiscuous, by Achilles slain:
The plain was dried, and stay’d the wat’ry flood.
As when the breath of Boreas quickly dries
In Autumn-time a newly-water’d field,
The tiller’s heart rejoicing: so was dried
The spacious plain; then he, the dead consum’d,
Against the river turn’d the fiery glare:
Burnt were the willows, elms, and tamarisk shrubs,
The lotus, and the reeds, and galingal,
Which by the lovely river grew profuse.
The eels and fishes, ’mid the eddying whirl,
’Mid the clear wave were hurrying here and there,
In dire distress from Vulcan’s fiery breath:
Scorch’d by the flames, the mighty River spoke:

“Vulcan, no God against thy pow’r can stand,
Nor with thy fiery flames will I contend;
Restrain thy wrath; though Peleus’ godlike son
Should from their city drive the Trojans straight,
With rival parties what concern have I?”

All scorch’d he spoke; his fair stream bubbling up,
As when a caldron on a blazing fire,
Fill’d with the melting fat of well-fed swine,
Boils up within, and bubbles all around,
With well-dried wood beneath, so bubbling up
The waters of the lovely River boil’d:
Nor onward would he flow, but check’d his course,
By the hot blast o’er-borne, and fiery strength
Of skilful Vulcan; and to Juno thus,
Imploring, he his winged words address’d:

“Juno, what cause impels thy son, my stream,
O’er all the rest, to visit with his wrath?
E’en less than others who the Trojans aid,
Have I offended; yet at thy command
Will I withdraw; but bid that he too cease;
And this I swear, no Trojan more to save,
Though to devouring flames a prey, all Troy
Were blazing, kindled by the valiant Greeks.”

This when the white-arm’d Goddess Juno heard,
To Vulcan straight she thus address’d her speech:
“Vulcan, my glorious son, restrain thy hand:
In mortal men’s behalf, it is not meet
To press thus hardly an Immortal God.”

She said, and Vulcan stay’d his fiery strength,
And, back returning, in his wonted bed
Flow’d the fair River. Xanthus thus subdued,
These two their warfare ceas’d, by Juno check’d,
Despite her wrath; but ’mid the other Gods
Arose contention fierce, and discord dire,
Their warring passions rous’d on either side.
With fearful crash they met: the broad Earth groan’d;
Loud rang the Heav’n as with a trumpet’s sound:
Jove, on Olympus’ height, the tumult heard,
And in his heart he laugh’d a joyous laugh,
To see the Gods in angry battle met.
Not long they stood aloof, led on by Mars
The buckler-breaker, who to Pallas first,
Poising his spear, his bitter speech address’d:

“What dost thou here, thou saucy jade, to war
The Gods exciting, overbold of mood,
Led by thy haughty spirit? dost thou forget
How thou the son of Tydeus, Diomed,
Didst urge against me, and with visible spear
Direct his aim, and aid to wound my flesh?
For all I suffer’d then, thou now shalt pay.”

Thus as he spoke, he struck the tassell’d shield,
Awful to view, which not the lightning bolt
Of Jove himself could pierce: the blood-stain’d Mars
Against it thrust in vain his pond’rous spear.
The Goddess stoop’d, and in her ample hand
Took up a stone, that lay upon the plain,
Dark, rugged, vast, which men of elder days
Had set to mark the limits of their land.
Full on the neck of Mars she hurl’d the mass,
His limbs relaxing: o’er sev’n hundred feet
Prostrate he lay, his hair defil’d with dust:
Loud rang his armour; and with scornful smile
Pallas address’d him thus with vaunting speech:

“Fool, hast thou yet to learn how mightier far
My strength than thine, that me thou dar’st to meet?
Bear thus the burthen of thy mother’s curse,
Who works thee harm, in wrath that thou the Greeks
Deserting, aid’st the haughty Trojans’ cause.”

She said, and turn’d away her piercing glance:
Him, deeply groaning, scarce to life restor’d,
Jove’s daughter Venus taking by the hand,
Led from the field; which when the white-arm’d Queen
Beheld, in haste to Pallas thus she cried:
“O Heav’n, brave child of aegis-bearing Jove,
Undaunted! lo again this saucy jade
Amid the press, the bane of mortals, Mars
Leads from the field; but haste thee in pursuit.”

Thus Juno: Pallas hasten’d in pursuit
Well pleas’d; and Venus with her pow’rful hand
Assailing, struck upon the breast; at once
The Goddess’ courage and her limbs gave way.
There on the ground the two together lay,
While Pallas o’er them thus with vaunting speech:

“Would all were such, who aid the Trojan cause,
Whene’er they meet in fight the warlike Greeks,
As valiant and as stout as Venus proves,
Who brings her aid to Mars, confronting me;
Then had our warlike labours long been o’er,
And Ilium’s strong-built citadel overthrown.”

Thus Pallas spoke: the white-arm’d Goddess smil’d,
And to Apollo thus th’ Earth-shaker spoke:

“Phoebus, why stand we idly thus aloof?
The war begun by others, ’tis not meet;
And shame it were, that to Olympus’ height
And to the brazen-floor’d abode of Jove
We two without a contest should return.
Thou then begin, as younger: ’twere not well
For me, in age and practice more advanc’d.
Feeble of soul, how senseless is thy heart!
Hast thou forgotten all the cruel wrongs
We two, alone of all th’ Immortals, bore,
When here, in Ilium, for a year, we serv’d,
By Jove’s command, the proud Laomedon,
For promis’d hire; and he our tasks assign’d?
His fortress, and a wall both broad and fair
I built, the town’s impregnable defence;
While thou didst on his plodding herds attend,
In many-crested Ida’s woody glens.
But when the joyous seasons, in their course,
Had brought our labour’s term, the haughty King
Denied our guerdon, and with threats dismiss’d.
Bound hand and foot, he threaten’d thee to send
And sell to slav’ry in the distant isles,
And with the sword cut off the ears of both.
So in indignant sorrow we return’d,
Robb’d of the hire he promis’d, but denied.
For this thy favour dost thou show to Troy;
And dost not rather join thy force to ours,
That down upon their knees the Trojans all
Should perish, with their babes and matrons chaste.”

Whom answer’d thus the far-destroying King:
“Earth-shaking God, I should not gain with thee
The esteem of wise, if I with thee should fight
For mortal men; poor wretches, who like leaves
Flourish awhile, and eat the fruits of earth,
But, sapless, soon decay: from combat then
Refrain we, and to others leave the strife.”

He turn’d, thus saying: for he deem’d it shame
His father’s brother to assail in arms;
But him his sister, Goddess of the chase,
Rebuk’d, and thus with scornful speech address’d:

“Fliest thou, Apollo? and to Neptune leav’st
The easy victory and baseless fame?
Why o’er thy shoulder hangs thine idle bow?
Ne’er in our father’s halls again, as erst
Among th’ Immortals, let me hear thee boast
How thou with Neptune wouldst in arms contend.”

Thus she; Apollo answer’d not a word;
But Jove’s imperial consort, fill’d with wrath,
Assail’d with bitter words the Archer-Queen.

“How canst thou dare, thou saucy minx, to stand[7]
Oppos’d to me, too great for thine assault,
Despite thy bow? though Jove hath giv’n thee pow’r
O’er feeble women, whom thou wilt, to slay,
E’en as a lion; better were’t for thee
To chase the mountain beasts and flying hinds,
Than thy superiors thus to meet in arms,
But since thou dar’st confront me, thou shalt know
And feel how far my might surpasses thine.”

She said; and with the left hand both the wrists
Of Dian grasping, with her ample right
The bow and quiver from her shoulders tore;
And with them, as she turn’d away her head,
With scornful laughter buffeted her ears:
The arrows keen were scatter’d on the ground:
Weeping, the Goddess fled; as flies a dove
The hawk’s pursuit, and in a hollow rock
Finds refuge, doom’d not yet to fall a prey;
So, weeping, Dian fled, and left her bow.

Them Hermes to Latona thus: “With thee
I strive not; shame it were to meet in fight
A consort of the cloud-compelling Jove.
Freely amid th’ Immortals make thy boast,
That by thy prowess thou hast vanquish’d me.”

Thus he: Latona gather’d up the bow,
And fallen arrows, scatter’d here and there
Amid the whirling dust; then, these regain’d,
Following her daughter, from the field withdrew.
Meanwhile to high Olympus fled the Maid,
And to the brazen-floor’d abode of Jove.
There, weeping, on her father’s knees she sat,
While quiver’d round her form th’ ambrosial robe.
The son of Saturn tow’rds him drew his child,
And thus, with gracious smile, enquiry made:
“Which of the heav’nly pow’rs hath wrong’d thee thus
My child, as guilty of some open shame?”

To whom the bright-crown’d Goddess of the chase:
“Thy wife, my father, white-arm’d Juno; she
Hath dealt thus rudely with me; she, from whom
All jars and strife among the Gods proceed.”

Such converse while they held, the gates of Troy
Apollo enter’d, for the well-built wall
Alarm’d, lest e’en against the will of fate
The Greeks that day should raze it to the ground.
The other Gods were to Olympus gone,
Triumphant these, and those in angry mood,
And took their seats before the cloud-girt Sire.
But on the Trojans pressing, Peleus’ son
Horses and men alike, promiscuous, slew.
As in a city, which the Gods in wrath
Have fir’d, whose volleying smoke ascends to Heav’n,
On all her people grievous toil is cast,
On many, harm and loss; such toil, such loss
Achilles wrought amid the Trojan host.

Upon a lofty tow’r, the work of Gods,
The aged Priam stood, and thence beheld
By fierce Achilles driven in flight confused,
Their courage quite subdued, the Trojan host:
Then, groaning, from the tow’r he hasten’d down,
And to the warders cried along the wall:

“Stand to the gates, and hold them open’d wide,
That in the crowd of fugitives may pour,
And refuge find; for close upon their flight
Achilles hangs; disaster now is near.
But while our friends, receiv’d within the walls,
Find time to breathe again, replace in haste
The closely-fitting portals; for I fear
That man of blood may e’en the city storm.”

He said; the gates they open’d, and drew back
The solid bars; the portals, op’ning wide,
Let in the light; but in the vacant space
Apollo stood, the Trojan host to save.
The flyers, parch’d with thirst and dust-begrim’d,
Straight for the city and the lofty wall
Made from the plain; Achilles, spear in hand,
Press’d hotly on the rearmost; for his soul
With rage was fill’d, and madd’ning lust of fame.
And now the lofty-gated city of Troy
The sons of Greece had won; but Phoebus rous’d
Agenor’s spirit, a valiant youth and strong,
Son of Antenor; he his bosom fill’d
With dauntless courage, and beside him stood
To turn aside the heavy hand of death,
As, veil’d in cloud, against the oak he lean’d.
He, when Achilles’ awful form he knew,
Yet firmly stood, though much perplex’d in mind,
As thus he commun’d with his mighty heart:

“Oh woe is me! should I attempt to fly
Before Achilles’ might, where fly the rest
Across the plain, disorder’d, he would soon
O’ertake me, and in flight ignoble slay.
Or should I leave the others to their fate,
Scatter’d by Peleus’ son; and from the wall
And o’er the plain of Troy direct my flight,
Far as the foot of Ida’s hill, and there
Lie hid in thickest covert; and at eve,
Refresh’d by bathing in the cooling stream,
And purg’d the sweat, retrace my steps to Troy?
Yet why, my soul, admit such thoughts as these?
For should he mark me flying from the town,
And overtake me by his speed of foot,
No hope were left me of escape from death.
So far his strength exceeds the strength of man.
But how if boldly I await him here
Before the wall? his flesh is not to wounds
Impervious: but a single life is his,
Nor is he more, they say, than mortal man,
Though Jove assists him, and his triumph wills.”

He said, and stood collected, to await
Achilles’ onset; and his manly heart,
With courage fill’d, was eager for the fray.
As when a panther from the thicket’s depth
Comes forth to meet the hunter, undismay’d,
Nor turn’d to flight by baying of the hounds;
Nor, wounded or by jav’lin or by sword,
Or by the spear transfix’d, remits her rage,
But fights, until she reach her foe, or die;
Agenor so, Antenor’s godlike son,
Disdain’d to fly, ere prove Achilles’ might.
Before his breast his shield’s broad orb he bore,
And pois’d his spear, as thus he call’d aloud:

“Thy hope, renown’d Achilles, was this day
The valiant Trojans’ city to destroy;
Unconscious of the toils, the woes, that ye
Around her walls await ye! for within
Are warriors brave and num’rous, who will fight
In her defence, for parents, children, wives.
Thou too, Achilles, here shalt meet thy doom,
All-pow’rful as thou art, and warrior bold.”

He said, and threw with stalwart hand the spear;
Achilles’ leg he struck, below the knee,
Nor miss’d his aim; and loudly rang the greaves
Of new-wrought tin; but back the brazen point
Rebounded, nor the heav’nly armour pierc’d.
In turn Achilles on Agenor sprang:
But Phoebus robb’d him of his hop’d-for prize,
Who, veil’d in thickest cloud, convey’d away
Antenor’s son, and from the battle bore
To rest in peace; while he by guile withdrew
The son of Peleus from the flying crowd:
For in Agenor’s very likeness clad,
Before him stood the far-destroying King:
Then fled, Achilles hast’ning in pursuit.
He o’er the fertile plain with flying foot
Pursu’d; beside Scamander’s eddying stream
Apollo turn’d, and still but little space
Before him flying, subtly lur’d him on,
Each moment hoping to attain his prize.
Meantime the gen’ral crowd, in panic flight,
With eager haste the city’s refuge sought,
And all the town with fugitives was fill’d.
Nor did they dare without the walls to stand
For mutual aid; nor halt to know what friends
Were safe, who left upon the battle-field;
But through the gates pour’d in the hurrying mass
Who to their active limbs their safety ow’d.





Thus they from panic flight, like timorous fawns.
Within the walls escaping, dried their sweat,
And drank, and quench’d their thirst, reclining safe
On the fair battlements; but nearer drew,
With slanted shields, the Greeks; yet Hector still
In front of Ilium and the Scaean gate,
Stay’d by his evil doom, remain’d without;
Then Phoebus thus to Peleus’ godlike son:
“Achilles, why with active feet pursue,
Thou mortal, me Immortal? know’st thou not
My Godhead, that so hot thy fury burns?
Or heed’st thou not that all the Trojan host
Whom thou hast scar’d, while thou art here withdrawn,
Within the walls a refuge safe have found?
On me thy sword is vain! I know not death!”

Enrag’d, Achilles, swift of foot, replied:
“Deep is the injury, far-darting King,
Most hostile of the Gods, that at thy hand
I bear, who here hast lur’d me from the walls,
Which many a Trojan else had fail’d to reach,
Ere by my hand they bit the bloody dust.
Me of immortal honour thou hast robb’d,
And them, thyself from vengeance safe, hast sav’d.
Had I the pow’r, that vengeance thou shouldst feel.”

Thus saying, and on mightiest deeds intent,
He turn’d him city-ward, with fiery speed;
As when a horse, contending for the prize,
Whirls the swift car, and stretches o’er the plain,
E’en so, with active limbs, Achilles rac’d.

Him first the aged Priam’s eyes discern’d,
Scouring the plain, in arms all dazzling bright,
Like to th’ autumnal star, whose brilliant ray
Shines eminent amid the depth of night,
Whom men the dog-star of Orion call;
The brightest he, but sign to mortal man
Of evil augury, and fiery heat:
So shone the brass upon the warrior’s breast.

The old man groan’d aloud, and lifting high
His hands, he beat his head, and with loud voice
Call’d on his son, imploring; he, unmov’d,
Held post before the gates, awaiting there
Achilles’ fierce encounter; him his sire,
With hands outstretch’d and piteous tone, address’d:

“Hector, my son, await not here alone
That warrior’s charge, lest thou to fate succumb,
Beneath Pelides’ arm, thy better far!
Accurs’d be he! would that th’ immortal Gods
So favour’d him as I! then should his corpse
Soon to the vultures and the dogs be giv’n!
(So should my heart a load of anguish lose)
By whom I am of many sons bereav’d,
Many and brave, whom he has slain, or sold
To distant isles in slav’ry; and e’en now,
Within the city walls I look in vain
For two, Lycaon brave, and Polydore,
My gallant sons, by fair Laothoe:
If haply yet they live, with brass and gold
Their ransom shall be paid; good store of these
We can command; for with his daughter fair
A wealthy dowry aged Altes gave.
But to the viewless shades should they have gone,
Deep were their mother’s sorrow and my own;
But of the gen’ral public, well I know
Far lighter were the grief, than if they heard
That thou hadst fall’n beneath Achilles’ hand.
Then enter now, my son, the city gates,
And of the women and the men of Troy,
Be still the guardian; nor to Peleus’ son,
With thine own life, immortal glory give.
Look too on me with pity; me, on whom,
E’en on the threshold of mine age, hath Jove
A bitter burthen cast, condemn’d to see
My sons struck down, my daughters dragg’d away
In servile bonds; our chambers’ sanctity
Invaded; and our babes by hostile hands
Dash’d to the ground; and by ferocious Greeks
Enslav’d the widows of my slaughter’d sons.
On me at last the rav’ning dogs shall feed,
When by some foeman’s hand, by sword or lance,
My soul shall from my body be divorc’d;
Those very dogs which I myself have bred,
Fed at my table, guardians of my gate,
Shall lap my blood, and over-gorg’d shall lie
E’en on my threshold. That a youth should fall
Victim, to Mars, beneath a foeman’s spear,
May well beseem his years; and if he fall
With honour, though he die, yet glorious he!
But when the hoary head and hoary beard,
And naked corpse to rav’ning dogs are giv’n,
No sadder sight can wretched mortals see.”

The old man spoke, and from, his head he tore
The hoary hair; yet Hector firm remain’d.
Then to the front his mother rush’d, in tears,
Her bosom bare, with either hand her breast
Sustaining, and with tears address’d him thus:
“Hector, my child, thy mother’s breast revere;
And on this bosom if thine infant woes
Have e’er been hush’d, bear now in mind, dear child,
The debt thou ow’st; and from within the walls
Ward off this fearful man, nor in the field
Encounter; curs’d be he! should he prevail,
And slay thee, not upon the fun’ral bed,
My child, my own, the offspring of my womb,
Shall I deplore thee, nor thy widow’d wife,
But far away, beside the Grecian ships,
Thy corpse shall to the rav’ning dogs be giv’n.”

Thus they, with tears and earnest pray’rs imploring,
Address’d their son; yet Hector firm remain’d,
Waiting th’ approach of Peleus’ godlike son.
As when a snake upon the mountain side,
With deadly venom charg’d, beside his hole,
Awaits the traveller, and fill’d with rage,
Coil’d round his hole, his baleful glances darts;
So fill’d with dauntless courage Hector stood,
Scorning retreat, his gleaming buckler propp’d
Against the jutting tow’r; then, deeply mov’d,
Thus with his warlike soul communion held:

“Oh woe is me! if I should enter now
The city gates, I should the just reproach
Encounter of Polydamas, who first
His counsel gave within the walls to lead
The Trojan forces, on that fatal night
When great Achilles in the field appear’d.
I heeded not his counsel; would I had!
Now, since my folly hath the people slain,
I well might blush to meet the Trojan men,
And long-rob’d dames of Troy, lest some might say,
To me inferior far, ‘This woful loss
To Hector’s blind self-confidence we owe.’
Thus shall they say; for me, ’twere better far,
Or from Achilles, slain in open fight,
Back to return in triumph, or myself
To perish nobly in my country’s cause.
What if my bossy shield I lay aside,
And stubborn helmet, and my pond’rous spear
Propping against the wall, go forth to meet
Th’ unmatch’d Achilles? What if I engage
That Helen’s self, and with her all the spoil,
And all that Paris in his hollow ships
Brought here to Troy, whence first this war arose,
Should be restor’d; and to the Greeks be paid
An ample tribute from the city’s stores,
Her secret treasures; and hereafter bind
The Trojans by their Elders’ solemn oaths
Nought to withhold, but fairly to divide
Whate’er of wealth our much-loved city holds?
But wherefore entertain such thoughts, my soul?
Should I so meet him, what if he should show
Nor pity nor remorse, but slay me there,
Defenceless as a woman, and unarm’d?
Not this the time, nor he the man, with whom
By forest oak or rock, like youth and maid,
To hold light talk, as youth and maid might hold.
Better to dare the fight, and know at once
To whom the vict’ry is decreed by Heav’n.”

Thus, as he stood, he mus’d; but near approach’d
Achilles, terrible as plumed Mars;
From his right shoulder brandishing aloft
The ashen spear of Peleus, while around
Flash’d his bright armour, dazzling as the glare
Of burning fire, or of the rising sun.
Hector beheld, and trembled at the sight;
Nor dar’d he there await th’ attack, but left
The gates behind, and, terror-stricken, fled.
Forward, with flying foot, Pelides rush’d.
As when a falcon, bird of swiftest flight,
From some high mountain-top, on tim’rous dove
Swoops fiercely down; she, from beneath, in fear,
Evades the stroke; he, dashing through the brake,
Shrill-shrieking, pounces on his destin’d prey;
So, wing’d with desp’rate hate, Achilles flew,
So Hector, flying from his keen pursuit,
Beneath the walls his active sinews plied.
They by the watch-tow’r, and beneath the wall
Where stood the wind-beat fig-tree, rac’d amain
Along the public road, until they reach’d
The fairly-flowing fount whence issu’d forth,
From double source, Scamander’s eddying streams.
One with hot current flows, and from beneath,
As from a furnace, clouds of steam arise;
’Mid summer’s heat the other rises cold
As hail, or snow, or water crystalliz’d;
Beside the fountains stood the washing-troughs
Of well-wrought stone, where erst the wives of Troy
And daughters fair their choicest garments wash’d,
In peaceful times, ere came the sons of Greece.
There rac’d they, one in flight, and one pursuing;
Good he who fled, but better who pursu’d,
With fiery speed; for on that race was stak’d
No common victim, no ignoble ox:
The prize at stake was mighty Hector’s life.
As when the solid-footed horses fly
Around the course, contending for the prize,
Tripod, or woman of her lord bereft;
So rac’d they thrice around the walls of Troy
With active feet; and all the Gods beheld.
Then thus began the Sire of Gods and men:
“A woful sight mine eyes behold; a man
I love in flight around the walls! my heart
For Hector grieves, who, now upon the crown
Of deeply-furrow’d Ida, now again
On Ilium’s heights, with fat of choicest bulls
Hath pil’d mine altar; whom around the walls,
With flying speed Achilles now pursues.
Give me your counsel, Gods, and say, from death
If we shall rescue him, or must he die,
Brave as he is, beneath Pelides’ hand?”

To whom the blue-ey’d Goddess, Pallas, thus:
“O Father, lightning-flashing, cloud-girt King,
What words are these? wouldst thou a mortal man,
Long doom’d by fate, again from death preserve?
Do as thou wilt, but not with our consent.”

To whom the Cloud-compeller thus replied:
“Be of good cheer, my child! unwillingly
I speak, yet both thy wishes to oppose:
Have then thy will, and draw not back thy hand.”

His words fresh impulse gave to Pallas’ zeal,
And from Olympus’ heights in haste she sped.

Meanwhile on Hector, with untiring hate.
The swift Achilles press’d: as when a hound,
Through glen and tangled brake, pursues a fawn,
Rous’d from its lair upon the mountain side;
And if awhile it should evade pursuit,
Low crouching in the copse, yet quests he back,
Searching unwearied, till he find the trace;
So Hector sought to baffle, but in vain,
The keen pursuit of Peleus’ active son.
Oft as he sought the shelter of the gates
Beneath the well-built tow’rs, if haply thence
His comrades’ weapons might some aid afford;
So oft his foeman, with superior speed,
Would cut him off, and turn him to the plain.
He tow’rd the city still essay’d his flight;
And as in dreams, when one pursues in vain,
One seeks in vain to fly, the other seeks
As vainly to pursue; so could not now
Achilles reach, nor Hector quit, his foe.
Yet how should Hector now the doom of death
Have ’scap’d, had not Apollo once again,
And for the last time, to his rescue come,
And giv’n him strength and suppleness of limb?

Then to the crowd Achilles with his head
Made sign that none at Hector should presume
To cast a spear, lest one might wound, and so
The greater glory obtain, while he himself
Must be contented with the second place.
But when the fourth time in their rapid course
The founts were reach’d, th’ Eternal Father hung
His golden scales aloft, and plac’d in each
The lots of doom, for great Achilles one,
For Hector one, and held them by the midst:
Down sank the scale, weighted with Hector’s death,
Down to the shades, and Phoebus left his side.

Then to Pelides came the blue-ey’d Maid,
And stood beside him, and bespoke him thus:
“Achilles, lov’d of Heav’n, I trust that now
To thee and me great glory shall accrue
In Hector’s fall, insatiate of the fight.
Escape he cannot now, though at the feet
Of aegis-bearing Jove, on his behalf,
With earnest pray’r Apollo prostrate fall.
But stay thou here and take thy breath, while I
Persuade him to return and dare the fight.”

So Pallas spoke; and he with joy obeying,
Stood leaning on his brass-barb’d ashen spear.
The Goddess left him there, and went (the form
And voice assuming of Deiphobus)
In search of godlike Hector; him she found,
And standing near, with winged words address’d:

“Sorely, good brother, hast thou been bested
By fierce Achilles, who around the walls
Hath chas’d thee with swift foot; now stand we both
For mutual succour, and his onset wait.”

To whom great Hector of the glancing helm:
“Deiphobus, of all my brothers, sons
Of Hecuba and Priam, thou hast been
Still dearest to my heart; and now the more
I honour thee who dar’st on my behalf,
Seeing my peril, from within the walls
To sally forth, while others skulk behind.”

To whom the blue-ey’d Goddess thus replied:
“With many pray’rs, good brother, both our sire
And honour’d mother, and our comrades all
Successively implored me to remain;
Such fear is fall’n on all; but in my soul
On thine account too deep a grief I felt.
Now, forward boldly! spare we not our spears;
Make trial if Achilles to the ships
From both of us our bloody spoils can bear,
Or by thine arm himself may be subdued.”

Thus Pallas lur’d him on with treach’rous wile;
But when the two were met, and close at hand,
First spoke great Hector of the glancing helm:

“No more before thee, Peleus’ son, I fly:
Thrice have I fled around the walls, nor dar’d
Await thine onset; now my spirit is rous’d
To stand before thee, to be slain, or slay.
But let us first th’ immortal Gods invoke;
The surest witnesses and guardians they
Of compacts: at my hand no foul disgrace
Shalt thou sustain, if Jove with victory
Shall crown my firm endurance, and thy life
To me be forfeit; of thine armour stripp’d
I promise thee, Achilles, to the Greeks
Thy body to restore; do thou the like.”

With fierce regard Achilles answer’d thus:
“Hector, thou object of my deadly hate,
Talk not to me of compacts; as ’tween men
And lions no firm concord can exist,
Nor wolves and lambs in harmony unite,
But ceaseless enmity between them dwells:
So not in friendly terms, nor compact firm,
Can thou and I unite, till one of us
Glut with his blood the mail-clad warrior Mars.
Mind thee of all thy fence; behoves thee now
To prove a spearman skill’d, and warrior brave.
For thee escape is none; now, by my spear,
Hath Pallas doom’d thy death; my comrades’ blood,
Which thou hast shed, shall all be now aveng’d.”

He said, and poising, hurl’d his weighty spear;
But Hector saw, and shunn’d the blow; he stoop’d,
And o’er his shoulder flew the brass-tipp’d spear,
And in the ground was fix’d; but Pallas drew
The weapon forth, and to Achilles’ hand,
All unobserv’d of Hector, gave it back.
Then Hector thus to Peleus’ matchless son:

“Thine aim has fail’d; nor truly has my fate,
Thou godlike son of Peleus, been to thee
From Heav’n reveal’d; such was indeed thy boast;
But flippant was thy speech, and subtly fram’d
To scare me with big words, and make me prove
False to my wonted prowess and renown.
Not in my back will I receive thy spear,
But through my breast, confronting thee, if Jove
Have to thine arm indeed such triumph giv’n.
Now, if thou canst, my spear in turn elude;
May it be deeply buried in thy flesh!
For lighter were to Troy the load of war,
If thou, the greatest of her foes, wert slain.”

He said, and poising, hurl’d his pond’rous spear;
Nor miss’d his aim; full in the midst he struck
Pelides’ shield; but glancing from the shield
The weapon bounded off. Hector was griev’d,
That thus his spear had bootless left his hand.
He stood aghast; no second spear was nigh:
And loudly on Deiphobus he call’d
A spear to bring; but he was far away.
Then Hector knew that he was dup’d, and cried,
“Oh Heav’n! the Gods above have doom’d my death!
I deem’d indeed that brave Deiphobus
Was near at hand; but he within the walls
Is safe, and I by Pallas am betray’d.
Now is my death at hand, nor far away:
Escape is none; since so hath Jove decreed,
And Jove’s far-darting son, who heretofore
Have been my guards; my fate hath found me now.
Yet not without a struggle let me die,
Nor all inglorious; but let some great act,
Which future days may hear of, mark my fall.”

Thus as he spoke, his sharp-edged sword he drew,
Pond’rous and vast, suspended at his side;
Collected for the spring, and forward dash’d:
As when an eagle, bird of loftiest flight,
Through the dark clouds swoops downward on the plain,
To seize some tender lamb, or cow’ring hare;
So Hector rush’d, and wav’d his sharp-edg’d sword.
Achilles’ wrath was rous’d: with fury wild
His soul was fill’d: before his breast he bore
His well-wrought shield; and fiercely on his brow
Nodded the four-plum’d helm, as on the breeze
Floated the golden hairs, with which the crest
By Vulcan’s hand was thickly interlac’d;
And as amid the stars’ unnumber’d host,
When twilight yields to night, one star appears,
Hesper, the brightest star that shines in Heav’n,
Gleam’d the sharp-pointed lance, which in his right
Achilles pois’d, on godlike Hector’s doom
Intent, and scanning eagerly to see
Where from attack his body least was fenc’d.
All else the glitt’ring armour guarded well,
Which Hector from Patroclus’ corpse had stripp’d;
One chink appear’d, just where the collar-bone
The neck and shoulder parts, beside the throat,
Where lies expos’d the swiftest road of death.
There levell’d he, as Hector onward rush’d;
Right through the yielding neck the lance was driv’n,
But sever’d not the windpipe, nor destroy’d
His pow’r of speech; prone in the dust he fell;
And o’er him, vaunting, thus Achilles spoke:

“Hector, Patroclus stripping of his arms,
Thy hope was that thyself wast safe; and I,
Not present, brought no terror to thy soul:
Fool! in the hollow ships I yet remain’d,
I, his avenger, mightier far than he;
I, who am now thy conqu’ror. By the dogs
And vultures shall thy corpse be foully torn,
While him the Greeks with fun’ral rites shall grace.”

Whom answer’d Hector of the glancing helm,
Prostrate and helpless: “By thy soul, thy knees,
Thy parents’ heads, Achilles, I beseech,
Let not my corpse by Grecian dogs be torn.
Accept the ample stores of brass and gold,
Which as my ransom by my honour’d sire
And mother shall be paid thee; but my corpse
Restore, that so the men and wives of Troy
May deck with honours due my fun’ral pyre.”

To whom, with fierce aspect, Achilles thus:
“Knee me no knees, vile hound! nor prate to me
Of parents! such my hatred, that almost
I could persuade myself to tear and eat
Thy mangled flesh; such wrongs I have to avenge,
He lives not, who can save thee from the dogs;
Not though with ransom ten and twenty fold
He here should stand, and yet should promise more;
No, not though Priam’s royal self should sue
To be allow’d for gold to ransom thee;
No, not e’en so, thy mother shall obtain
To lay thee out upon the couch, and mourn
O’er thee, her offspring; but on all thy limbs
Shall dogs and carrion vultures make their feast.”

To whom thus Hector of the glancing helm,
Dying: “I know thee well; nor did I hope
To change thy purpose; iron is thy soul.
But see that on thy head I bring not down
The wrath of Heav’n, when by the Scaean gate
The hand of Paris, with Apollo’s aid,
Brave warrior as thou art, shall strike thee down.”

E’en as he spoke, his eyes were clos’d in death;
And to the viewless shades his spirit fled,
Mourning his fate, his youth and vigour lost.

To him, though dead, Achilles thus replied:
“Die thou! my fate I then shall meet, whene’er
Jove and th’ immortal Gods shall so decree.”

He said, and from the corpse his spear withdrew,
And laid aside; then stripp’d the armour off,
With, blood besmear’d; the Greeks around him throng’d,
Gazing on Hector’s noble form and face,
And none approach’d that did not add a wound:
And one to other look’d, and said, “Good faith,
Hector is easier far to handle now,
Then when erewhile he wrapp’d our ships in fire.”
Thus would they say, then stab the dead anew.

But when the son of Peleus, swift of foot,
Had stripp’d the armour from the corpse, he rose,
And, standing, thus th’ assembled Greeks address’d:
“O friends, the chiefs and councillors of Greece,
Since Heav’n hath granted us this man to slay,
Whose single arm hath wrought us more of ill
Than all the rest combin’d, advance we now
Before the city in arms, and trial make
What is the mind of Troy; if, Hector slain,
They from the citadel intend retreat,
Or still, despite their loss, their ground maintain.
But wherefore entertain such thoughts, my soul?
Beside the ships, unwept, unburied, lies
Patroclus: whom I never can forget,
While number’d with the living, and my limbs
Have pow’r to move; in Hades though the dead
May be forgotten, yet e’en there will I
The mem’ry of my lov’d companion keep.
Now to the ships return we, sons of Greece,
Glad paeans singing! with us he shall go;
Great glory is ours, the godlike Hector slain,
The pride of Troy, and as a God rever’d.”

He said, and foully Hector’s corpse misus’d;
Of either foot he pierc’d the tendon through,
That from the ancle passes to the heel,
And to his chariot bound with leathern thongs,
Leaving the head to trail along the ground;
Then mounted, with the captur’d arms, his car,
And urg’d his horses; nothing loth, they flew.
A cloud of dust the trailing body rais’d:
Loose hung his glossy hair; and in the dust
Was laid that noble head, so graceful once;
Now to foul insult doom’d by Jove’s decree,
In his own country, by a foeman’s hand.
So lay the head of Hector; at the sight
His aged mother tore her hair, and far
From off her head the glitt’ring veil she threw,
And with loud cries her slaughter’d son bewail’d.
Piteous, his father groan’d; and all around
Was heard the voice of wailing and of woe.
Such was the cry, as if the beetling height
Of Ilium all were smould’ring in the fire.
Scarce in his anguish could the crowd restrain
The old man from issuing through the Dardan gates;
Low in the dust he roll’d, imploring all,
Entreating by his name each sev’ral man:
“Forbear, my friends; though sorrowing, stay me not;
Leave me to reach alone the Grecian ships,
And there implore this man of violence,
This haughty chief, if haply he my years
May rev’rence, and have pity on my age.
For he too has a father, like to me;
Peleus, by whom he was begot, and bred,
The bane of Troy; and, most of all, to me
The cause of endless grief, who by his hand
Have been of many stalwart sons bereft.
Yet all, though griev’d for all, I less lament,
Than one, whose loss will sink me to the grave,
Hector! oh would to Heav’n that in mine arms
He could have died; with mourning then and tears
We might have satisfied our grief, both she
Who bore him, hapless mother, and myself.”

Weeping, he spoke; and with him wept the crowd:
Then, ’mid the women, Hecuba pour’d forth
Her vehement grief: “My child, oh whither now,
Heart-stricken, shall I go, of thee bereft,
Of thee, who wast to me by night and day
A glory and a boast; the strength of all
The men of Troy, and women? as a God
They worshipp’d thee: for in thy life thou wast
The glory of all; but fate hath found thee now.”

Weeping, she spoke; but nought as yet was known
To Hector’s wife; to her no messenger
Had brought the tidings, that without the walls
Remained her husband; in her house withdrawn
A web she wove, all purple, double woof,
With varied flow’rs in rich embroidery,
And to her neat-hair’d maidens gave command
To place the largest caldrons on the fire,
That with warm baths, returning from the fight,
Hector might be refresh’d; unconscious she,
That by Achilles’ hand, with Pallas’ aid,
Far from the bath, was godlike Hector slain.
The sounds of wailing reach’d her from the tow’r;
Totter’d her limbs, the distaff left her hand,
And to her neat-hair’d maidens thus she spoke:
“Haste, follow me, some two, that I may know
What mean these sounds; my honour’d mother’s voice
I hear; and in my breast my beating heart
Leaps to my mouth; my limbs refuse to move;
Some evil, sure, on Priam’s house impends.
Be unfulfill’d my words! yet much I fear
Lest my brave Hector be cut off alone,
By great Achilles, from the walls of Troy,
Chas’d to the plain, the desp’rate courage quench’d,
Which ever led him from the gen’ral ranks
Far in advance, and bade him yield to none.”

Then from the house she rush’d, like one distract,
With beating heart; and with her went her maids.
But when she reach’d the tow’r, where stood the crowd,
And mounted on the wall, she look’d around,
And saw the body which with insult foul
The flying steeds were dragging towards the ships;
Then sudden darkness overspread her eyes;
Backward she fell, and gasp’d her spirit away.
Far off were flung th’ adornments of her head,
The net, the fillet, and the woven bands;
The nuptial veil by golden Venus giv’n,
That day when Hector of the glancing helm
Led from Eetion’s house his wealthy bride.
The sisters of her husband round her press’d,
And held, as in the deadly swoon she lay.
But when her breath and spirit return’d again,
With sudden burst of anguish thus she cried:
“Hector, oh woe is me! to misery
We both were born alike; thou here in Troy
In Priam’s royal palace; I in Thebes,
By wooded Placos, in Eetion’s house,
Who nurs’d my infancy; unhappy he,
Unhappier I! would I had ne’er been born!
Now thou beneath the depths of earth art gone,
Gone to the viewless shades; and me hast left
A widow in thy house, in deepest woe;
Our child, an infant still, thy child and mine,
Ill-fated parents both! nor thou to him,
Hector, shalt be a guard, nor he to thee:
For though he ’scape this tearful war with Greece,
Yet nought for him remains but ceaseless woe,
And strangers on his heritage shall seize.
No young companions own the orphan boy:
With downcast eyes, and cheeks bedew’d with tears,
His father’s friends approaching, pinch’d with want,
He hangs upon the skirt of one, of one
He plucks the cloak; perchance in pity some
May at their tables let him sip the cup,
Moisten his lips, but scarce his palate touch;
While youths, with both surviving parents bless’d,
May drive him from their feast with blows and taunts,
‘Begone! thy father sits not at our board:’
Then weeping, to his widow’d mother’s arms
He flies, that orphan boy, Astyanax,
Who on his father’s knees erewhile was fed
On choicest marrow, and the fat of lambs;
And, when in sleep his childish play was hush’d,
Was lull’d to slumber in his nurse’s arms
On softest couch, by all delights surrounded.
But grief, his father lost, awaits him now,
Astyanax, of Trojans so surnam’d,
Since thou alone wast Troy’s defence and guard.
But now on thee, beside the beaked ships,
Far from thy parents, when the rav’ning dogs
Have had their fill, the wriggling worms shall feed;
On thee, all naked; while within thy house
Lies store of raiment, rich and rare, the work
Of women’s hands; these will I burn with fire;
Not for thy need—thou ne’er shalt wear them more,—
But for thine honour in the sight of Troy.”

Weeping she spoke; the women join’d her wail.




Thus they throughout the city made their moan;
But when the Greeks had come where lay their ships
By the broad Hellespont, their sev’ral ways
They each pursu’d, dispersing; yet not so
Achilles let his Myrmidons disperse,
But thus his warlike comrades he address’d:

“My faithful comrades, valiant Myrmidons,
Loose we not yet our horses from the cars;
But for Patroclus mourn, approaching near,
With horse and car; such tribute claim the dead;
Then, free indulgence to our sorrows giv’n,
Loose we the steeds, and share the ev’ning meal.”

He said; and they with mingled voices rais’d
The solemn dirge; Achilles led the strain;
Thrice round the dead they drove their sleek-skinn’d steeds,
Mourning, with hearts by Thetis grief-inspir’d;
With tears the sands, with tears the warriors’ arms,
Were wet; so mighty was the chief they mourn’d.
Then on his comrade’s breast Achilles laid
His blood-stain’d hands, and thus began the wail:

“All hail, Patroclus, though in Pluto’s realm;
All that I promis’d, lo! I now perform;
That on the corpse of Hector, hither dragg’d,
Our dogs should feed; and that twelve noble youths,
The sons of Troy, before thy fun’ral pyre,
My hand, in vengeance for thy death, should slay.”

He said, and foully Hector’s corpse misus’d,
Flung prostrate in the dust, beside the couch
Where lay Menoetius’ son. His comrades then
Their glitt’ring armour doff’d, of polish’d brass,
And loos’d their neighing steeds; then round the ship
Of Peleus’ son in countless numbers sat,
While he th’ abundant fun’ral feast dispens’d.
There many a steer lay stretch’d beneath the knife,
And many a sheep, and many a bleating goat,
And many a white-tusk’d porker, rich in fat,
There lay extended, singeing o’er the fire;
And blood, in torrents, flow’d around the corpse.
To Agamemnon then the Kings of Greece
The royal son of Peleus, swift of foot,
Conducted; yet with him they scarce prevail’d;
So fierce his anger for his comrade’s death.
But when to Agamemnon’s tent they came,
He to the clear-voic’d heralds gave command
An ample tripod on the fire to place;
If haply Peleus’ son he might persuade
To wash away the bloody stains of war:
But sternly he, and with an oath refus’d.

“No, by great Jove I swear, of all the Gods
Highest and mightiest, water shall not touch
This head of mine, till on the fun’ral pyre
I see the body of Patroclus laid,
And build his tomb, and cut my votive hair;
For while I live and move ’mid mortal men,
No second grief like this can pierce my soul.
Observe we now the mournful fun’ral feast;
But thou, great Agamemnon, King of men,
Send forth at early dawn, and to the camp
Bring store of fuel, and all else prepare,
That with provision meet the dead may pass
Down to the realms of night; so shall the fire
From out our sight consume our mighty dead,
And to their wonted tasks the troops return.”

He said; they listen’d, and his words obey’d;
Then busily the ev’ning meal prepar’d,
And shar’d the social feast; nor lack’d there aught.
The rage of thirst and hunger satisfied,
Each to their sev’ral tents the rest repair’d;
But on the many-dashing ocean’s shore
Pelides lay, amid his Myrmidons,
With bitter groans; in a clear space he lay,
Where broke the waves, continuous, on the beach.
There, circumfus’d around him, gentle sleep,
Lulling the sorrows of his heart to rest,
O’ercame his senses; for the hot pursuit
Of Hector round the breezy heights of Troy
His active limbs had wearied: as he slept,
Sudden appear’d Patroclus’ mournful shade,
His very self; his height, and beauteous eyes,
And voice; the very garb he wont to wear:
Above his head it stood, and thus it spoke:

“Sleep’st thou, Achilles, mindless of thy friend,
Neglecting, not the living, but the dead?
Hasten my fun’ral rites, that I may pass
Through Hades’ gloomy gates; ere those be done,
The spirits and spectres of departed men
Drive me far from them, nor allow to cross
Th’ abhorred river; but forlorn and sad
I wander through the wide-spread realms of night.
And give me now thy hand, whereon to weep;
For never more, when laid upon the pyre,
Shall I return from Hades; never more,
Apart from all our comrades, shall we two,
As friends, sweet counsel take; for me, stern Death,
The common lot of man, has op’d his mouth;
Thou too, Achilles, rival of the Gods,
Art destin’d here beneath the walls of Troy
To meet thy doom; yet one thing must I add,
And make, if thou wilt grant it, one request.
Let not my bones be laid apart from thine,
Achilles, but together, as our youth
Was spent together in thy father’s house,
Since first my sire Menoetius me a boy
From Opus brought, a luckless homicide,
Who of Amphidamas, by evil chance,
Had slain the son, disputing o’er the dice:
Me noble Peleus in his house receiv’d,
And kindly nurs’d, and thine attendant nam’d;
So in one urn be now our bones enclos’d,
The golden vase, thy Goddess-mother’s gift.”

Whom answer’d thus Achilles, swift of foot:
“Why art thou here, lov’d being? why on me
These sev’ral charges lay? whate’er thou bidd’st
Will I perform, and all thy mind fulfil;
But draw thou near; and in one short embrace,
Let us, while yet we may, our grief indulge.”

Thus as he spoke, he spread his longing arms,
But nought he clasp’d; and with a wailing cry,
Vanish’d, like smoke, the spirit beneath the earth.
Up sprang Achilles, all amaz’d, and smote
His hands together, and lamenting cried:

“O Heav’n, there are then, in the realms below,
Spirits and spectres, unsubstantial all;
For through the night Patroclus’ shade hath stood,
Weeping and wailing, at my side, and told
His bidding; th’ image of himself it seem’d.”

He said; his words the gen’ral grief arous’d:
To them, as round the piteous dead they mourn’d,
Appear’d the rosy-finger’d morn; and straight,
From all the camp, by Agamemnon sent,
Went forth, in search of fuel, men and mules,
Led by a valiant chief, Meriones,
The follower of renown’d Idomeneus.
Their felling axes in their hands they bore,
And twisted ropes; their mules before them driv’n;
Now up, now down, now sideways, now aslope,
They journey’d on; but when they reach’d the foot
Of spring-abounding Ida, they began
With axes keen to hew the lofty oaks;
They, loudly crashing, fell: the wood they clove,
And bound it to the mules; these took their way
Through the thick brushwood, hurrying to the plain.
The axe-men too, so bade Meriones,
The follower of renown’d Idomeneus,
Were laden all with logs, which on the beach
They laid in order, where a lofty mound,
In mem’ry of Patroclus and himself,
Achilles had design’d. When all the store
Of wood was duly laid, the rest remain’d
In masses seated; but Achilles bade
The warlike Myrmidons their armour don,
And harness each his horses to his car;
They rose and donn’d their arms, and on the cars
Warriors and charioteers their places took.

First came the horse, and then a cloud of foot,
Unnumber’d; in the midst Patroclus came,
Borne by his comrades; all the corpse with hair
They cover’d o’er, which from their heads they shore.
Behind, Achilles held his head, and mourn’d
The noble friend whom to the tomb he bore.
Then on the spot by Peleus’ son assign’d,
They laid him down, and pil’d the wood on high.
Then a fresh thought Achilles’ mind conceiv’d:
Standing apart, the yellow locks he shore,
Which as an off’ring to Sperchius’ stream,
He nurs’d in rich profusion; sorrowing then
Look’d o’er the dark-blue sea, as thus he spoke:

“Sperchius, all in vain to thee his pray’r
My father Peleus made, and vow’d that I,
Return’d in safety to my native land,
To thee should dedicate my hair, and pay
A solemn hecatomb, with sacrifice
Of fifty rams, unblemish’d, to the springs
Where on thy consecrated soil is plac’d
Thine incense-honour’d altar; so he vow’d;
But thou the boon withhold’st; since I no more
My native land may see, the hair he vow’d,
To brave Patroclus thus I dedicate.”

He said, and on his comrade’s hand he laid
The locks; his act the gen’ral grief arous’d;
And now the setting sun had found them still
Indulging o’er the dead; but Peleus’ son
Approaching, thus to Agamemnon spoke:

“Atrides, for to thee the people pay
Readiest obedience, mourning too prolong’d
May weary; thou then from the pyre the rest
Disperse, and bid prepare the morning meal;
Ours be the farther charge, to whom the dead
Was chiefly dear; yet let the chiefs remain.”

The monarch Agamemnon heard, and straight
Dispers’d the crowd amid their sev’ral ships.
Th’ appointed band remain’d, and pil’d the wood.
A hundred feet each way they built the pyre,
And on the summit, sorrowing, laid the dead.
Then many a sheep and many a slow-paced ox
They flay’d and dress’d around the fun’ral pyre;
Of all the beasts Achilles took the fat,
And cover’d o’er the corpse from head to foot,
And heap’d the slaughter’d carcases around;
Then jars of honey plac’d, and fragrant oils,
Resting upon the couch; next, groaning loud,
Four pow’rful horses on the pyre he threw;
Then, of nine dogs that at their master’s board
Had fed, he slaughter’d two upon his pyre;
Last, with the sword, by evil counsel sway’d,
Twelve noble youths he slew, the sons of Troy.
The fire’s devouring might he then applied,
And, groaning, on his lov’d companion call’d:

“All hail, Patroclus, though in Pluto’s realm!
All that I promis’d, lo! I now perform:
On twelve brave sons of Trojan sires, with thee,
The flames shall feed; but Hector, Priam’s son,
Not to the fire, but to the dogs I give.”

Such was Achilles’ threat, but him the dogs
Molested not; for Venus, night and day
Daughter of Jove, the rav’ning dogs restrain’d;
And all the corpse o’erlaid with roseate oil,
Ambrosial, that though dragg’d along the earth,
The noble dead might not receive a wound.
Apollo too a cloudy veil from Heav’n
Spread o’er the plain, and cover’d all the space
Where lay the dead, nor let the blazing sun
The flesh upon his limbs and muscles parch.
Yet burnt not up Patroclus’ fun’ral pyre;
Then a fresh thought Achilles’ mind conceiv’d:
Standing apart, on both the Winds he call’d,
Boreas and Zephyrus, and added vows
Of costly sacrifice; and pouring forth
Libations from a golden goblet, pray’d
Their presence, that the wood might haste to burn,
And with the fire consume the dead; his pray’r
Swift Iris heard, and bore it to the Winds.
They in the hall of gusty Zephyrus
Were gather’d round the feast; in haste appearing,
Swift Iris on the stony threshold stood.
They saw, and rising all, besought her each
To sit beside him; she with their requests
Refus’d compliance, and address’d them thus:

“No seat for me; for I o’er th’ ocean stream
From hence am bound to Æthiopia’s shore,
To share the sacred feast, and hecatombs,
Which there they offer to th’ immortal Gods;
But, Boreas, thee, and loud-voic’d Zephyrus,
With vows of sacrifice, Achilles calls
To fan the fun’ral pyre, whereon is laid
Patroclus, mourn’d by all the host of Greece.”

She said, and vanish’d; they, with rushing sound,
Rose, and before them drove the hurrying clouds:
Soon o’er the sea they swept; the stirring breeze
Ruffled the waves; the fertile shores of Troy
They reach’d, and falling on the fun’ral pyre,
Loud roar’d the crackling flames; they all night long
With current brisk together fann’d the fire.
All night Achilles from a golden bowl
Drew forth, and, in his hand a double cup,
The wine outpouring, moisten’d all the earth,
Still calling on his lost Patroclus’ shade.
As mourns a father o’er a youthful son,
Whose early death hath wrung his parents’ hearts;
So mourn’d Achilles o’er his friend’s remains,
Prostrate beside the pyre, and groan’d aloud.
But when the star of Lucifer appear’d,
The harbinger of light, whom following close
Spreads o’er the sea the saffron-robed morn,
Then pal’d the smould’ring fire, and sank the flame;
And o’er the Thracian sea, that groan’d and heav’d
Beneath their passage, home the Winds return’d;
And weary, from the pyre a space withdrawn,
Achilles lay, o’ercome by gentle sleep.

Anon, awaken’d by the tramp and din
Of crowds that follow’d Atreus’ royal son,
He sat upright, and thus address’d his speech:

“Thou son of Atreus, and ye chiefs of Greece,
Far as the flames extended, quench we first
With ruddy wine the embers of the pyre;
And of Menoetius’ son, Patroclus, next
With care distinguishing, collect the bones;
Nor are they hard to know; for in the midst
He lay, while round the edges of the pyre,
Horses and men commix’d, the rest were burnt.
Let these, between a double layer of fat
Enclos’d, and in a golden urn remain,
Till I myself shall in the tomb be laid;
And o’er them build a mound, not over-large,
But of proportions meet; in days to come,
Ye Greeks, who after me shall here remain,
Complete the work, and build it broad and high.”

Thus spoke Achilles; they his words obey’d:
Far as the flames had reach’d, and thickly strown
The embers lay, they quench’d with ruddy wine;
Then tearfully their gentle comrade’s bones
Collected, and with double layers of fat
Enclos’d, and in a golden urn encas’d;
Then in the tent they laid them, overspread
With veil of linen fair; then meting out
Th’ allotted space, the deep foundations laid
Around the pyre, and o’er them heap’d the earth.
Their task accomplished, all had now withdrawn;
But Peleus’ son the vast assembly stay’d,
And bade them sit; then, prizes of the games,
Tripods and caldrons from the tents he brought,
And noble steeds, and mules, and sturdy steers,
And women fair of form, and iron hoar.

First, for the contest of the flying cars
The prizes he display’d: a woman fair,
Well skill’d in household cares; a tripod vast,
Two-handled, two and twenty measures round;
These both were for the victor: for the next,
A mare, unbroken, six years old, in foal
Of a mule colt; the third, a caldron bright,
Capacious of four measures, white and pure,
By fire as yet untarnish’d; for the fourth,
Of gold two talents; for the fifth, a vase
With double cup, untouch’d by fire, he gave.
Then, standing up, he thus address’d the Greeks:

“Thou son of Atreus, and ye well-greav’d Greeks,
Before ye are the prizes, which await
The contest of the cars; but if, ye Greeks,
For any other cause these games were held,
I to my tent should bear the foremost prize;
For well ye know how far my steeds excel,
Steeds of immortal race, which Neptune gave
To Peleus, he to me, his son, transferr’d.
But from the present strife we stand aloof,
My horses and myself; they now have lost
The daring courage and the gentle hand
Of him who drove them, and with water pure
Wash’d oft their manes, and bath’d with fragrant oil.
For him they stand and mourn, with drooping heads
Down to the ground, their hearts with sorrow fill’d;
But ye in order range yourselves, who boast
Your well-built chariots and your horses’ speed.”

He said: up sprang the eager charioteers;
The first of all, Eumelus, King of men,
Son of Admetus, matchless charioteer;
Next, Tydeus’ son, the valiant Diomed,
With Trojan horses, from Æneas won,
When by Apollo’s aid himself escap’d;
Then Heav’n-born Menelaus, Atreus’ son,
Two flying coursers harness’d to his car;
His own, Podargus, had for yokefellow
Æthe, a mare by Agamemnon lent:
Her, Echepolus to Atrides gave,
Anchises’ son, that to the wars of Troy
He might not be compell’d, but safe at home
Enjoy his ease; for Jove had bless’d his store
With ample wealth, in Sicyon’s wide domain.
Her now he yok’d, impatient for the course.
The fourth, Antilochus, the gallant son
Of Nestor, son of Neleus, mighty chief,
Harness’d his sleek-skinn’d steeds; of Pylian race
Were they who bore his car; to him, his sire
Sage counsel pour’d in understanding ears:

“Antilochus, though young in years thou art,
Yet Jove and Neptune love thee, and have well
Instructed thee in horsemanship; of me
Thou need’st no counsel; skill’d around the goal
To whirl the chariot; but thou hast, of all,
The slowest horses: whence I augur ill.
But though their horses have the speed of thine,
In skill not one of them surpasses thee.
Then thou, dear boy, exert thine ev’ry art,
That so thou mayst not fail to gain a prize.
By skill, far more than strength, the woodman fells
The sturdy oak; by skill the steersman guides
His flying ship across the dark-blue sea,
Though shatter’d by the blast; ’twixt charioteer
And charioteer ’tis skill that draws the line.
One, vainly trusting to his coursers’ speed,
Drives reckless here and there; o’er all the course,
His horses, unrestrain’d, at random run.
Another, with inferior horses far,
But better skill’d, still fixing on the goal
His eye, turns closely round, nor overlooks
The moment when to draw the rein; but holds
His steady course, and on the leader waits.
A mark I give thee now, thou canst not miss:
There stands a wither’d trunk, some six feet high,
Of oak, or pine, unrotted by the rain;
On either side have two white stones been plac’d,
Where meet two roads; and all around there lies
A smooth and level course; here stood perchance
The tomb of one who died long years ago;
Or former generations here have plac’d,
As now Achilles hath decreed, a goal.
There drive, as only not to graze the post;
And leaning o’er the wicker body, leave
Close on the left the stones; thine offside horse
Then urge with voice and whip, and slack his rein,
And let the nearside horse so closely graze,
As that thy nave may seem to touch, the goal:
But yet beware, lest, striking on the stone,
Thy steeds thou injure, and thy chariot break,
A source of triumph to thy rivals all,
Of shame to thee; but thou sage caution use;
For, following, if thou make the turn the first,
Not one of all shall pass thee, or o’ertake;
Not though Arion’s self were in the car,
Adrastus’ flying steed, of heav’nly race,
Nor those which here Laomedon possess’d.”

This said, and to his son his counsels giv’n,
The aged Nestor to his seat withdrew.
Fifth in the lists Meriones appear’d.
They mounted on their cars, and cast their lots:
Achilles shook the helmet; first leaped forth
The lot of Nestor’s son, Antilochus;
Next came the King Eumelus; after whom
The valiant Menelaus, Atreus’ son;
The fourth, Meriones; and last of all,
But ablest far, Tydides drew his place.
They stood in line; Achilles pointed out,
Ear on the level plain, the distant goal;
And there in charge the godlike Phoenix plac’d,
His father’s ancient follower, to observe
The course assign’d, and true report to make.
Then all at once their whips they rais’d, and urg’d
By rein, and hand, and voice, their eager steeds.
They from the ships pursued their rapid course
Athwart the distant plain; beneath their chests
Rose like a cloud, or hurricane, the dust;
Loose floated on the breeze their ample manes;
The cars now skimm’d along the fertile ground,
Now bounded high in air; the charioteers
Stood up aloft, and ev’ry bosom beat
With hope of vict’ry; each with eager shout
Cheering his steeds, that scour’d the dusty plain.
But when, the farthest limits of the course
Attain’d, they turn’d beside the hoary sea,
Strain’d to their utmost speed, were plainly seen
The qualities of each; then in the front
Appear’d Eumelus’ flying mares, and next
The Trojan horses of Tydides came:
Nor these were far behind, but following close
They seem’d in act to leap upon the car.
Eumelus, on his neck and shoulders broad,
Felt their warm breath; for o’er him, as they flew,
Their heads were downward bent; and now, perchance,
Had he or pass’d, or made an even race,
But that, incens’d with valiant Diomed,
Apollo wrested from his hands the whip.
Then tears of anger from his eyelids fell,
As gaining more and more the mares he saw,
While, urg’d no more, his horses slack’d their speed.
But Pallas mark’d Apollo’s treach’rous wile;
And hasting to the chief, restor’d his whip,
And to his horses strength and courage gave.
The Goddess then Admetus’ son pursued,
And snapp’d his chariot yoke; the mares, releas’d,
Swerv’d from the track; the pole upon the ground
Lay loosen’d from the car; and he himself
Beside the wheel was from the chariot hurl’d.
From elbows, mouth, and nose, the skin was torn;
His forehead crush’d and batter’d in; his eyes
Were fill’d with tears, and mute his cheerful voice.
Tydides turn’d aside, and far ahead
Of all the rest, pass’d on; for Pallas gave
His horses courage, and his triumph will’d.
Next him, the fair-hair’d Menelaus came,
The son of Atreus; but Antilochus
Thus to his father’s horses call’d aloud:

“Forward, and stretch ye to your utmost speed;
I ask you not with those of Diomed
In vain to strive, whom Pallas hath endued
With added swiftness, and his triumph will’d;
But haste ye, and o’ertake Atrides’ car,
Nor be by Æthe, by a mare, disgrac’d.
Why, my brave horses, why be left behind?
This too I warn ye, and will make it good:
No more at Nestor’s hand shall ye receive
Your provender, but with the sword be slain,
If by your faults a lower prize be ours;
Then rouse ye now, and put forth all your speed,
And I will so contrive, as not to fail
Of slipping past them in the narrow way.”

He said; the horses, of his voice in awe,
Put forth their pow’rs awhile; before them soon
Antilochus the narrow pass espied.
It was a gully, where the winter’s rain
Had lain collected, and had broken through
A length of road, and hollow’d out the ground:
There Menelaus held his cautious course.
Fearing collision; but Antilochus,
Drawing his steeds a little from the track,
Bore down upon him sideways: then in fear,
The son of Atreus to Antilochus
Shouted aloud, “Antilochus, thou driv’st
Like one insane; hold in awhile thy steeds;
Here is no space; where wider grows the road,
There thou mayst pass; but here, thou wilt but cause
Our cars to clash, and bring us both to harm.”

He said; but madlier drove Antilochus,
Plying the goad, as though he heard him not.

Far as a discus’ flight, by some stout youth,
That tests his vigour, from the shoulder hurl’d,
So far they ran together, side by side:
Then dropp’d Atrides’ horses to the rear,
For he himself forbore to urge their speed,
Lest, meeting in the narrow pass, the cars
Should be o’erthrown, and they themselves, in haste
To gain the vict’ry, in the dust be roll’d.
Then thus, reproachful, to Antilochus:

“Antilochus, thou most perverse of men!
Beshrew thy heart! we Greeks are much deceiv’d
Who give thee fame for wisdom! yet e’en now
Thou shalt not gain, but on thine oath, the prize.”

He said, and to his horses call’d aloud:
“Slack not your speed, nor, as defeated, mourn;
Their legs and feet will sooner tire than yours,
For both are past the vigour of their youth.”
Thus he; the horses, of his voice in awe,
Put forth their pow’rs, and soon the leaders near’d.

Meanwhile the chieftains, seated in the ring,
Look’d for the cars, that scour’d the dusty plain.
The first to see them was Idomeneus,
The Cretan King; for he, without the ring,
Was posted high aloft; and from afar
He heard and knew the foremost horseman’s voice;
Well too he knew the gallant horse that led,
All bay the rest, but on his front alone
A star of white, full-orbed as the moon:
Then up he rose, and thus the Greeks address’d:

“O friends, the chiefs and councillors of Greece,
Can ye too see, or I alone, the cars?
A diff’rent chariot seems to me in front,
A diff’rent charioteer; and they who first
Were leading, must have met with some mischance.
I saw them late, ere round the goal they turn’d,
But see them now no more; though all around
My eyes explore the wide-spread plain of Troy.
Perchance the charioteer has dropp’d the reins,
Or round the goal he could not hold the mares;
Perchance has miss’d the turn, and on the plain
Is lying now beside his broken car,
While from the course his mettled steeds have flown.
Stand up, and look yourselves; I cannot well
Distinguish; but to me it seems a chief,
Who reigns o’er Greeks, though of Ætolian race,
The son of Tydeus, valiant Diomed.”

Sharply Oileus’ active son replied:
“Idomeneus, why thus, before the time,
So rashly speak? while the high-stepping steeds
Are speeding yet across the distant plain.
Thine eyes are not the youngest in the camp,
Nor look they out the sharpest from thy head;
But thou art ever hasty in thy speech,
And ill becomes thee this precipitance.
Since others are there here, thy betters far.
The same are leading now, that led at first,
Eumelus’ mares; ’tis he that holds the reins.”

To whom in anger thus the Cretan chief:
“Ajax, at wrangling good, in judgment naught,
And for aught else, among the chiefs of Greece
Of small account—so stubborn is thy soul;
Wilt thou a tripod or a caldron stake,
And Agamemnon, Atreus’ son, appoint
The umpire to decide whose steeds are first?
So shalt thou gain thy knowledge at thy cost.”

He said; up sprang Oileus’ active son,
In anger to reply; and farther yet
Had gone the quarrel, but Achilles’ self
Stood up, and thus the rival chiefs address’d:

“Forbear, both Ajax and Idomeneus,
This bitter interchange of wordy war;
It is not seemly; and yourselves, I know,
Another would condemn, who so should speak.
But stay ye here, and seated in the ring,
Their coming wait; they, hurrying to the goal,
Will soon be here; and then shall each man know
Whose horses are the second, whose the first.”

Thus he; but Tydeus’ son drew near, his lash
Still laid upon his horses’ shoulder-points;
As lightly they, high-stepping, scour’d the plain.
Still on the charioteer the dust was flung;
As close upon the flying-footed steeds
Follow’d the car with gold and tin inlaid;
And lightly, as they flew along, were left
Impress’d the wheel-tracks on the sandy plain.
There in the midst he stood, the sweat profuse
Down-pouring from his horses’ heads and chests;
Down from the glitt’ring car he leap’d to earth,
And lean’d his whip against the chariot yoke;
Nor long delay’d the valiant Sthenelus,
But eagerly sprang forth to claim the prize;
Then to his brave companions gave in charge
To lead away the woman, and to bear
The tripod, while himself unyok’d the steeds.

Nest came the horses of Antilochus,
Who had by stratagem, and not by speed,
O’er Menelaus triumph’d; yet e’en so
Atrides’ flying coursers press’d him hard;
For but so far as from the chariot-wheel
A horse, when harness’d to a royal car;
Whose tail, back-streaming, with the utmost hairs
Brushes the felloes; close before the wheel,
Small space between, he scours the wide-spread plain:
So far was Menelaus in the rear
Of Nestor’s son; at first, a discus’ cast
Between them lay; but rapidly his ground
He gain’d—so well the speed and courage serv’d
Of Æthe, Agamemnon’s beauteous mare;
And, but a little farther were the course,
Had pass’d him by, nor left the race in doubt.
Behind the noble son of Atreus came,
A jav’lin’s flight apart, Meriones,
The faithful follower of Idomeneus:
His were the slowest horses, and himself
The least experienc’d in the rapid race.
Dragging his broken car, came last of all,
His horses driv’n in front, Admetus’ son;
Achilles swift of foot with pity saw,
And to the Greeks his winged words address’d:

“See where the best of all the last appears;
But let him take, as meet, the second prize;
The first belongs of right to Tydeus’ son.”

Thus he; they all assented to his words;
And, by the gen’ral voice of Greece, the mare
Had now been his; but noble Nestor’s son,
Antilochus, stood up, his right to claim,
And to Achilles, Peleus’ son, replied:
“Achilles, thou wilt do me grievous wrong,
If thou thy words accomplish; for my prize
Thou tak’st away, because mishap befell
His car and horses, by no fault of his;
Yet had he to th’ Immortals made his pray’r,
He surely had not thus been last of all.
But, pitying him, if so thy mind incline,
Thy tents contain good store of gold, and brass,
And sheep, and female slaves, and noble steeds;
For him, of these, hereafter mayst thou take
A prize of higher value; or e’en now,
And with th’ applause of all; but for the mare,
I will not give her up; and let who will
Stand forth, my own right hand shall guard my prize.”

He said; and smil’d Achilles swift of foot,
Delighted; for he lov’d the noble youth,
To whom his winged words he thus address’d:

“Antilochus, if such be thy request,
That for Eumelus I should add a prize,
This too I grant thee; and to him I give
My breastplate, from Asteropaeus won,
Of brass, around whose edge is roll’d a stream
Of shining tin; a gift of goodly price.”

He said, and bade Automedon, his friend
And comrade, bring the breastplate from his tent;
He went, and brought it; in Eumelus’ hand
He plac’d it; he with joy the gift receiv’d.
Then Menelaus, sad at heart, arose,
Burning with wrath against Antilochus;
And while the herald in the monarch’s hand
His royal sceptre plac’d, and bade the Greeks
Keep silence, thus the godlike hero spoke:

“Antilochus, till now reputed wise,
What hast thou done? thou hast impugn’d my skill,
And sham’d my horses, who hast brought thine own,
Inferior far, before them to the goal.
But come, ye chiefs and councillors of Greece,
Judge ye between us, fav’ring neither side:
That none of all the brass-clad Greeks may say
That Menelaus hath by false reports
O’erborne Antilochus, and holds his prize:
His horses fairly worsted, and himself
Triumphant only by superior pow’r.
Or come now, I myself will judgment give;
Nor deem I any Greek will find to blame
In my decision, for ’tis fair and just.
Antilochus, come forward, noble chief;
And standing, as ’tis meet, before the car
And horses, in thy hand the slender whip
Wherewith thou drov’st, upon the horses lay
Thy hand, and by Earth-shaking Neptune swear
That not of malice, and by set design,
Thou didst by fraud impede my chariot’s course.”

To whom Antilochus with prudent speech:
“Have patience with me yet; for I, O King,
O Menelaus, am thy junior far;
My elder and superior thee I own.
Thou know’st th’ o’er-eager vehemence of youth,
How quick in temper, and in judgment weak.
Set then thy heart at ease; the mare I won
I freely give; and if aught else of mine
Thou shouldst desire, would sooner give it all,
Than all my life be low’r’d, illustrious King,
In thine esteem, and sin against the Gods.”

Thus saying, noble Nestor’s son led forth,
And plac’d in Menelaus’ hands the mare:
The monarch’s soul was melted, like the dew
Which glitters on the ears of growing corn,
That bristle o’er the plain; e’en so thy soul,
O Menelaus, melted at his speech;
To whom were thus address’d thy winged words:

“Antilochus, at once I lay aside
My anger; thou art prudent, and not apt
To be thus led astray; but now thy youth
Thy judgment hath o’erpow’r’d; seek not henceforth
By trick’ry o’er thine elders to prevail.
To any other man of all the Greeks
I scarce so much had yielded; but for that
Thyself hast labour’d much, and much endur’d,
Thou, thy good sire, and brother, in my cause:
I yield me to thy pray’rs; and give, to boot,
The mare, though mine of right; that these may know
I am not of a harsh, unyielding mood.”

He said, and to Noemon gave in charge,
The faithful comrade of Antilochus,
The mare; himself the glitt’ring caldron took.
Of gold two talents, to the fourth assign’d,
Fourth in the race, Meriones receiv’d;
Still the fifth prize, a vase with double cup,
Remain’d; Achilles this to Nestor gave,
Before th’ assembled Greeks, as thus he spoke:

“Take this, old man, and for an heirloom keep,
In mem’ry of Patroclus’ fun’ral games,
Whom thou no more amid the Greeks shalt see.
Freely I give it thee; for thou no more
Canst box, or wrestle, or in sportive strife
The jav’lin throw, or race with flying feet;
For age with heavy hand hath bow’d thee down.”

He said, and plac’d it in his hand; th’ old man
Beceiv’d with joy the gift, and thus replied:

“All thou hast said, my son, is simple truth:
No firmness now my limbs and feet retain,
Nor can my arms with freedom, as of old,
Straight from the shoulder, right and left, strike out.
Oh that such youth and vigour yet were mine,
As when th’ Epeians in Buprasium held
The royal Amarynceus’ fun’ral games,
And when the monarch’s sons his prizes gave!
Then could not one of all th’ Epeian race,
Or Pylians, or Ætolians, vie with me.
In boxing, Clytomedes, Œnops’ son,
I vanquished; then Anchaeus, who stood up
To wrestle with me, I with ease o’erthrew;
Iphiclus I outran, though fleet of foot;
In hurling with the spear, with Phyleus strove,
And Polydorus, and surpass’d them both.
The sons of Actor in the chariot-race
Alone o’ercame me; as in number more,[8]
And grudging more my triumph, since remain’d,
This contest to reward, the richest prize.
They were twin brothers; one who held the reins,
Still drove, and drove; the other plied the whip.
Such was I once; but now must younger men
Engage in deeds like these; and I, the chief
Of heroes once, must bow to weary age.
But honour thou with fitting fun’ral games
Thy comrade: I accept, well-pleas’d, thy gift,
My heart rejoicing that thou still retain’st
Of me a kindly mem’ry, nor o’erlook’st
The place of honour, which among the Greeks
Belongs to me of right; for this, the Gods
Reward thee with a worthy recompense!”

He said; Achilles listen’d to the praise
Of Neleus’ son; then join’d the gen’ral throng.
Next, he set forth the prizes, to reward
The labours of the sturdy pugilists;
A hardy mule he tether’d in the ring,
Unbroken, six years old, most hard to tame;
And for the vanquished man, a double cup;
Then rose, and to the Greeks proclaim’d aloud:

“Thou son of Atreus, and ye well-greav’d Greeks,
For these we bid two champions brave stand forth.
And in the boxer’s manly toil contend;
And he, whose stern endurance Phoebus crowns
With vict’ry, recogniz’d by all the Greeks,
He to his tent shall lead the hardy mule;
The loser shall the double cup receive.”

He said; up sprang Epeius, tall and stout,
A boxer skill’d, the son of Panopeus,
Who laid his hand upon the mule, and said:

“Stand forth, if any care the cup to win;
The mule, methinks, no Greek can bear away
From me, who glory in the champion’s name.
Is’t not enough, that in the battle-field
I claim no special praise? ’tis not for man
In all things to excel; but this I say,
And will make good my words, who meets me here,
I mean to pound his flesh, and smash his bones.
See that his seconds be at hand, and prompt
To bear him from the ring, by me subdued.”

He said; they all in silence heard his speech:
Only Euryalus, a godlike chief,
Son of Mecistheus, Talaion’s son,
Stood forth opposing; he had once in Thebes
Join’d in the fun’ral games of Œdipus,
And there had vanquish’d all of Cadmian race.
On him attended valiant Diomed,
With cheering words, and wishes of success.
Around his waist he fasten’d first the belt,
Then gave the well-cut gauntlets for his hands.
Of wild bull’s hide. When both were thus equipp’d,
Into the centre of the ring they stepp’d:
There, face to face, with sinewy arms uprais’d,
They stood awhile, then clos’d; strong hand with hand
Mingling, in rapid interchange of blows.
Dire was the clatter of their jaws; the sweat
Pour’d forth, profuse, from ev’ry limb; then rush’d
Epeius on, and full upon the cheek,
Half turn’d aside, let fall a stagg’ring blow;
Nor stood Euryalus; but, legs and feet
Knock’d from beneath him, prone to earth he fell;
And as a fish, that flounders on the sand,
Thrown by rude Boreas on the weedy beach,
Till cover’d o’er by the returning wave;
So flounder’d he beneath that stunning blow.
But brave Epeius took him by the hand,
And rais’d him up; his comrades crowded round
And bore him from the field, with dragging steps,
Spitting forth clotted gore, his heavy head
Rolling from side to side; within his tent
They laid him down, unconscious; to the ring
Then back returning, bore away the cup.

Achilles next before the Greeks display’d
The prizes of the hardy wrestlers’ skill:
The victor’s prize, a tripod vast, fire-proof,
And at twelve oxen by the Greeks apprais’d;
And for the vanquish’d man, a female slave
Pric’d at four oxen, skill’d in household work.
Then rose, and loudly to the Greeks proclaim’d,
“Stand forth, whoe’er this contest will essay.”

He said; and straight uprose the giant form
Of Ajax Telamon; with him uprose
Ulysses, skill’d in ev’ry crafty wile.
Girt with the belt, within the ring they stood,
And each, with stalwart grasp, laid hold on each;
As stand two rafters of a lofty house,
Each propping each, by skilful architect
Design’d the tempest’s fury to withstand.
Creak’d their backbones beneath the tug and strain
Of those strong arms; their sweat pour’d down like rain;
And bloody weals of livid purple hue
Their sides and shoulders streak’d, as sternly they
For vict’ry and the well-wrought tripod strove.
Nor could Ulysses Ajax overthrow,
Nor Ajax bring Ulysses to the ground,
So stubbornly he stood; but when the Greeks
Were weary of the long-protracted strife,
Thus to Ulysses mighty Ajax spoke:
“Ulysses sage, Laertes’ godlike son,
Or lift thou me, or I will thee uplift:
The issue of our struggle rests with Jove.”

He said, and rais’d Ulysses from the ground;
Nor he his ancient craft remember’d not,
But lock’d his leg around, and striking sharp
Upon the hollow of the knee, the joint
Gave way; the giant Ajax backwards fell,
Ulysses on his breast; the people saw,
And marvell’d. Then in turn Ulysses strove
Ajax to lift; a little way he mov’d,
But fail’d to lift him fairly from, the ground;
Yet crook’d his knee, that both together fell,
And side by side, defil’d with dust, they lay.

And now a third encounter had they tried
But rose Achilles, and the combat stay’d:

“Forbear, nor waste your strength, in farther strife;
Ye both are victors; both then bear away
An equal meed of honour; and withdraw,
That other Greeks may other contests wage.”
Thus spoke Achilles: they his words obey’d,
And brushing off the dust, their garments donn’d.

The prizes of the runners, swift of foot,
Achilles next set forth; a silver bowl,
Six measures its content, for workmanship
Unmatch’d on earth, of Sidon’s costliest art
The product rare; thence o’er the misty sea
Brought by Phoenicians, who, in port arriv’d,
Gave it to Thoas; by Euneus last,
The son of Jason, to Patroclus paid,
In ransom of Lycaon, Priam’s son;
Which now Achilles, on his friend’s behalf,
Assign’d as his reward, whoe’er should prove
The lightest foot, and speediest in the race.
A steer, well fatten’d, was the second prize,
And half a talent, for the third, of gold.
He rose, and to the Greeks proclaim’d aloud,
“Stand forth, whoe’er this contest will essay.”
He said: uprose Oileus’ active son;
Uprose Ulysses, skill’d in ev’ry wile,
And noble Nestor’s son, Antilochus,
Who all the youth in speed of foot surpass’d.
They stood in line: Achilles pointed out
The limits of the course; as from the goal
They stretch’d them to the race, Oileus’ son
First shot ahead; Ulysses following close;
Nor farther than the shuttle from the breast
Of some fair woman, when her outstretch’d arm
Has thrown the woof athwart the warp, and back
Withdraws it tow’rd her breast; so close behind
Ulysses press’d on Ajax, and his feet
Trod in his steps, ere settled yet the dust.
His breath was on his shoulders, as the plain
He lightly skimm’d; the Greeks with eager shouts
Still cheering, as he strain’d to win the prize.
But as they near’d the goal, Ulysses thus
To blue-ey’d Pallas made his mental pray’r:
“Now hear me, Goddess, and my feet befriend.”
Thus as he pray’d, his pray’r the Goddess heard,
And all his limbs with active vigour fill’d;
And, as they stretch’d their hands to seize the prize,
Tripp’d up by Pallas, Ajax slipp’d and fell,
Amid the offal of the lowing kine
Which o’er Patroclus Peleus’ son had slain.
His mouth and nostrils were with offal fill’d.
First in the race, Ulysses bore away
The silver bowl; the steer to Ajax fell;
And as upon the horn he laid his hand,
Sputt’ring the offal out, he call’d aloud:
“Lo, how the Goddess has my steps bewray’d,
Who guards Ulysses with a mother’s care.”
Thus as he spoke, loud laugh’d the merry Greeks.
Antilochus the sole remaining prize
Receiv’d, and, laughing, thus the Greeks address’d:

“I tell you, friends, but what yourselves do know,
How of the elder men th’ immortal Gods
Take special care; for Ajax’ years not much
Exceed mine own; but here we see a man,
One of a former age, and race of men;
A hale old man we call him; but for speed
Not one can match him, save Achilles’ self.”

Thus he, with praise implied of Peleus’ son;
To whom in answer thus Achilles spoke:

“Antilochus, not unobserv’d of me
Nor unrewarded shall thy praise remain:
To thy half talent add this second half.”

Thus saying, in his hand he plac’d the gold;
Antilochus with joy the gift receiv’d.

Next, in the ring the son of Peleus laid
A pond’rous spear, a helmet, and a shield,
The spoil Patroclus from Sarpedon won;
Then rose, and loudly to the Greeks proclaim’d:

“For these we call upon two champions brave
To don their arms, their sharp-edg’d weapons grasp,
And public trial of their prowess make;
And he who first his rival’s flesh shall reach,
And, through his armour piercing, first draw blood,
He shall this silver-studded sword receive,
My trophy from Asteropaeus won,
Well-wrought, of Thracian metal; but the arms
In common property they both shall hold,
And in my tent a noble banquet share.”

He said; uprose great Ajax Telamon,
And Tydeus’ son, the valiant Diomed.
First, from the crowd apart, they donn’d their arms;
Then, eager for the fight, with haughty stare
Stood in the midst; the Greeks admiring gaz’d.
When, each approaching other, near they came,
Thrice rush’d they on, and thrice in combat clos’d.
Then through the buckler round of Diomed
Great Ajax drove his spear; nor reach’d the point
Tydides’ body, by the breastplate stay’d:
While, aim’d above the mighty shield’s defence,
His glitt’ring weapon flash’d at Ajax’ throat.
For Ajax fearing, shouted then the Greeks
To cease the fight, and share alike the prize;
But from Achilles’ hand the mighty sword,
With belt and scabbard, Diomed receiv’d.

Next in the ring the son of Peleus plac’d
A pond’rous mass of iron, as a quoit
Once wielded by Eetion’s giant strength,
But to the ships with other trophies borne,
When by Achilles’ hand Eetion fell.
Then rose, and loudly to the Greeks proclaim’d:
“Stand forth, whoe’er this contest will essay.
This prize who wins, though widely may extend
His fertile fields, for five revolving years
It will his wants supply; nor to the town
For lack of iron, with this mass in store,
Need he his shepherd or his ploughman send.”

He said; and valiant Polypoetes rose,
Epeius, and Leonteus’ godlike strength,
And mighty Ajax, son of Telamon.
In turns they took their stand; Epeius first
Uprais’d the pond’rous mass, and through the air
Hurl’d it, amid the laughter of the Greeks.
Next came Leonteus, scion true of Mars;
The third was Ajax; from whose stalwart hand
Beyond the farthest mark the missile flew.
But when the valiant Polypoetes took
The quoit in hand, far as a herdsman throws
His staff, that, whirling, flies among the herd;
So far beyond the ring’s extremest bound
He threw the pond’rous mass; loud were the shouts;
And noble Polypoetes’ comrades rose,
And to the ships the monarch’s gift convey’d.

The archers’ prizes next, of iron hoar,
Ten sturdy axes, double-edg’d, he plac’d,
And single hatchets ten; then far away
Rear’d on the sand a dark-prow’d vessel’s mast,
On which, with slender string, a tim’rous dove
Was fasten’d by the foot, the archers’ mark;
That who should strike the dove should to his tent
The axes bear away; but who the string
Should sever, but should fail to strike the bird,
As less in skill, the hatchets should receive.
Thus spoke Achilles; straight uprose the might
Of royal Teucer, and Meriones,
The faithful follower of Idomeneus.
They in a brass-bound helmet shook the lots.
The first was Teucer’s; with impetuous force
He shot; but vow’d not to the Archer-King
Of firstling lambs a solemn hecatomb.
The dove he struck not, for the Archer-God
Withheld his aid; but close beside her foot
The arrow sever’d the retaining string.
The bird releas’d, soar’d heav’nward; while the string
Dropp’d, from the mast suspended, tow’rds the earth,
And loudly shouted their applause the Greeks.
Then snatch’d Meriones in haste the bow
From Teucer’s hand; his own already held
His arrow, pointed straight; he drew the string,
And to the far-destroying King he vow’d
Of firstling lambs a solemn hecatomb.
Aloft amid the clouds he mark’d the dove,
And struck her, as she soar’d, beneath the wing;
Right through the arrow pass’d; and to the earth
Returning, fell beside Meriones.
The bird upon the dark-prow’d vessel’s mast
Lighted awhile; anon, with drooping head,
And pinions flutt’ring vain, afar she fell,
Lifeless; th’ admiring crowd with wonder gaz’d.
Meriones the axes bore away,
While Teucer to the ships the hatchets bore.

Last, in the ring the son of Peleus laid
A pond’rous spear, and caldron, burnish’d bright,
Pric’d at an ox’s worth, untouch’d by fire,
For those who with the jav’lin would contend.
Uprose then Agamemnon, King of men,
The son of Atreus, and Meriones,
The faithful follower of Idomeneus:
But Peleus’ godlike son address’d them thus:

“How far, Atrides, thou excell’st us all,
And with the jav’lin what thy pow’r and skill
Pre-eminent, we know; take thou this prize,
And bear it to thy ships; and let us give
To brave Meriones the brazen spear;
If so it please thee, such were my advice.”

He said; and Agamemnon, King of men,
Assenting, gave to brave Meriones
The brazen spear; while in Talthybius’ care,
His herald, plac’d the King his noble prize.




The games were ended, and the multitude
Amid the ships their sev’ral ways dispers’d:
Some to their supper, some to gentle sleep
Yielding, delighted; but Achilles still
Mourn’d o’er his lov’d companion; not on him
Lighted all-conqu’ring sleep, but to and fro
Restless he toss’d, and on Patroclus thought,
His vigour and his courage; all the deeds
They two together had achiev’d; the toils,
The perils they had undergone, amid
The strife of warriors, and the angry waves.
Stirr’d by such mem’ries, bitter tears he shed;
Now turning on his side, and now again
Upon his back; then prone upon his face;
Then starting to his feet, along the shore
All objectless, despairing, would he roam;
Nor did the morn, above the sea appearing,
Unmark’d of him arise; his flying steeds
He then would harness, and, behind the car
The corpse of Hector trailing in the dust,
Thrice make the circuit of Patroclus’ tomb;
Then would he turn within his tent to rest,
Leaving the prostrate corpse with dust defil’d;
But from unseemly marks the valiant dead
Apollo guarded, who with pity view’d
The hero, though in death; and round him threw
His golden aegis; nor, though dragg’d along,
Allow’d his body to receive a wound.

Thus foully did Achilles in his rage
Misuse the mighty dead; the blessed Gods
With pitying grief beheld the sight, and urg’d
That Hermes should by stealth the corpse remove.
The counsel pleas’d the rest; but Juno still,
And Neptune, and the blue-ey’d Maid, retain’d
The hatred, unappeas’d, with which of old
Troy and her King and people they pursued;
Since Paris to the rival Goddesses,
Who to his sheepfold came, gave deep offence,
Preferring her who brought him in return
The fatal boon of too successful love.
But when the twelfth revolving day was come,
Apollo thus th’ assembled Gods address’d:
“Shame on ye, Gods, ungrateful! have ye not,
At Hector’s hand, of bulls and choicest goats
Receiv’d your off’rings meet? and fear ye now
E’en his dead corpse to save, and grant his wife,
His mother, and his child, his aged sire
And people, to behold him, and to raise
His fun’ral pile, and with due rites entomb?
But fell Achilles all your aid commands;
Of mind unrighteous, and inflexible
His stubborn heart; his thoughts are all of blood;
E’en as a lion, whom his mighty strength
And dauntless courage lead to leap the fold,
And ’mid the trembling flocks to seize his prey;
E’en so Achilles hath discarded ruth,
And conscience, arbiter of good and ill.
A man may lose his best-lov’d friend, a son,
Or his own mother’s son, a brother dear:
He mourns and weeps, but time his grief allays,
For fate to man a patient mind hath giv’n:
But godlike Hector’s body, after death,
Achilles, unrelenting, foully drags,
Lash’d to his car, around his comrade’s tomb.
This is not to his praise; though brave he be,
Yet thus our anger he may justly rouse,
Who in his rage insults the senseless clay.”

To whom, indignant, white-arm’d Juno thus:
“Some show of reason were there in thy speech,
God of the silver bow, could Hector boast
Of equal dignity with Peleus’ son.
A mortal one, and nurs’d at woman’s breast;
The other, of a Goddess born, whom I
Nurtur’d and rear’d, and to a mortal gave
In marriage; gave to Peleus, best belov’d
By all th’ Immortals, of the race of man.
Ye, Gods, attended all the marriage rites;
Thou too, companion base, false friend, wast there,
And, playing on thy lyre, didst share the feast.”

To whom the Cloud-compeller answer’d thus:
“Juno, restrain thy wrath; they shall not both
Attain like honour; yet was Hector once,
Of all the mortals that in Ilium dwell,
Dearest to all the Gods, and chief to me;
For never did he fail his gifts to bring.
And with, burnt-off’rings and libations due
My altars crown; such worship I receiv’d.
Yet shall bold Hector’s body, not without
The knowledge of Achilles, be remov’d;
For day and night his Goddess-mother keeps
Her constant watch beside him. Then, some God
Bid Thetis hither to my presence haste;
And I with prudent words will counsel her,
That so Achilles may at Priam’s hand
Large ransom take, and set brave Hector free.”

He said; and promptly on his errand sprang
The storm-swift Iris; in the dark-blue sea
She plung’d, midway ’twixt Imbros’ rugged shore
And Samos’ isle; the parting waters plash’d.
As down to ocean’s lowest depths she dropp’d,
Like to a plummet, which the fisherman
Lets fall, encas’d in wild bull’s horn, to bear
Destruction to the sea’s voracious tribes.
There found she Thetis in a hollow cave,
Around her rang’d the Ocean Goddesses:
She, in the midst, was weeping o’er the fate
Her matchless son awaiting, doom’d to die
Far from his home, on fertile plains of Troy.
Swift-footed Iris at her side appear’d,
And thus address’d her: “Hasten, Thetis; Jove,
Lord of immortal counsel, summons thee.”
To whom the silver-footed Goddess thus:
“What would with me the mighty King of Heav’n?
Press’d as I am with grief, I am asham’d
To mingle with the Gods; yet will I go:
Nor shall he speak in vain, whate’er his words.”

Thus as she spoke, her veil the Goddess took,
All black, than which none deeper could be found;
She rose to go; the storm-swift Iris led
The way before her; ocean’s parted waves
Around their path receded; to the beach
Ascending, upwards straight to Heav’n they sprang.
Th’ all-seeing son of Saturn there they found,
And rang’d around him all th’ immortal Gods.
Pallas made way; and by the throne of Jove
Sat Thetis, Juno proff’ring to her hand
A goblet fair of gold, and adding words
Of welcome; she the cup receiv’d, and drank.
Then thus began the sire of Gods and men:
“Thou, Thetis, sorrowing to Olympus com’st,
Borne down by ceaseless grief; I know it well;
Yet hear the cause for which I summon’d thee.
About Achilles, thy victorious son,
And valiant Hector’s body, for nine days
Hath contest been in Heav’n; and some have urg’d
That Hermes should by stealth the corpse remove.
This to Achilles’ praise I mean to turn,
And thus thy rev’rence and thy love retain.
Then haste thee to the camp, and to thy son
My message bear; tell him that all the Gods
Are fill’d with wrath; and I above the rest
Am angry, that beside the beaked ships,
He, mad with rage, the corpse of Hector keeps:
So may he fear me, and restore the dead.
Iris meantime to Priam I will send,
And bid him seek the Grecian ships, and there
Obtain his son’s release: and with him bring
Such presents as may melt Achilles’ heart.”

He said; the silver-footed Queen obey’d;
Down from Olympus’ heights in haste she sped,
And sought her son; him found she in his tent,
Groaning with anguish, while his comrades round,
Plying their tasks, prepar’d the morning meal.
For them a goodly sheep, full-fleec’d, was slain.
Close by his side his Goddess-mother stood,
And gently touch’d him with her hand, and said,
“How long, my son, wilt thou thy soul consume
With grief and mourning, mindful nor of food
Nor sleep? nor dost thou wisely, to abstain
From woman’s love; for short thy time on earth:
Death and imperious fate are close at hand.
Hear then my words; a messenger from Jove
To thee I come, to tell thee that the Gods
Are fill’d with wrath, and he above the rest
Is angry, that beside the beaked ships
Thou, mad with rage, the corpse of Hector keep’st.
Then ransom take, and liberate the dead.”

To whom Achilles, swift of foot, replied:
“So be it; ransom let him bring, and bear
His dead away, if such the will of Jove.”

Thus, in the concourse of the ships, they two,
Mother and son, their lengthen’d converse held.

Then Saturn’s son to Iris gave command:
“Haste thee, swift Iris, from Olympus’ height,
To Troy, to royal Priam bear my words;
And bid him seek the Grecian ships, and there
Obtain his son’s release; and with him take
Such presents as may melt Achilles’ heart.
Alone, no Trojan with him, must he go;
Yet may a herald on his steps attend,
Some aged man, his smoothly-rolling car
And mules to drive; and to the city back
To bring his dead, whom great Achilles slew.
Nor let the fear of death disturb his mind:
Hermes shall with him, as his escort, go,
And to Achilles’ presence safely bring.
Arriv’d within the tent, nor he himself
Will slay him, but from others will protect.
Not ignorant is he, nor void of sense,
Nor disobedient to the Gods’ behest
But will with pitying eyes his suppliant view.”

He said; and on his errand sped in haste
The storm-swift Iris; when to Priam’s house
She came, the sounds of wailing met her ear.
Within the court, around their father, sat
His sons, their raiment all bedew’d with tears;
And in the midst, close cover’d with his robe,
Their sire, his head and neck with dirt defil’d,
Which, wallowing on the earth, himself had heap’d,
With his own hands, upon his hoary head.
Throughout the house his daughters loudly wail’d
In mem’ry of the many and the brave
Who lay in death, by Grecian warriors slain.
Beside him stood the messenger of Jove,
And whisper’d, while his limbs with terror shook:
“Fear nothing, Priam, son of Dardanus,
Nor let thy mind be troubled; not for ill,
But here on kindly errand am I sent:
To thee I come, a messenger from Jove,
Who from on high looks down on thee with eyes
Of pitying love; he bids thee ransom home
The godlike Hector’s corpse; and with thee take
Such presents as may melt Achilles’ heart.
Alone, no Trojan with thee, must thou go;
Yet may a herald on thy steps attend,
Some aged man, thy smoothly-rolling car
And mules to drive, and to the city back
To bring thy dead, whom great Achilles slew.
Nor let the fear of death disturb thy mind:
Hermes shall with thee, as thine escort, go,
And to Achilles’ presence safely bring.
Arriv’d within the tent, nor he himself
Will slay thee, but from others will protect;
Not ignorant is he, nor void of sense,
Nor disobedient to the Gods’ behest,
But will with pitying eyes his suppliant view.”

Swift-footed Iris said, and vanish’d straight:
He to his sons commandment gave, the mules
To yoke beneath the smoothly-rolling car,
And on the axle fix the wicker seat.
Himself the lofty cedar chamber sought,
Fragrant, high-roof’d, with countless treasures stor’d;
And call’d to Hecuba his wife, and said,
“Good wife, a messenger from Jove hath come,
Who bids me seek the Grecian ships, and there
Obtain my son’s release; and with me take
Such presents as may melt Achilles’ heart.
Say then, what think’st thou? for my mind inclines
To seek the ships within the Grecian camp.”

So he; but Hecuba lamenting cried,
“Alas, alas! where are thy senses gone?
And where the wisdom, once of high repute
’Mid strangers, and ’mid those o’er whom thou reign’st?
How canst thou think alone to seek the ships,
Ent’ring his presence, who thy sons hath slain,
Many and brave? an iron heart is thine!
Of that bloodthirsty and perfidious man,
If thou within the sight and reach shalt come,
No pity will he feel, no rev’rence show:
Rather remain we here apart and mourn;
For him, when at his birth his thread of life
Was spun by fate, ’twas destin’d that afar
From home and parents, he should glut the maw
Of rav’ning dogs, by that stern warrior’s tent,
Whose inmost heart I would I could devour:
Such for my son were adequate revenge,
Whom not in ignominious flight he slew;
But standing, thoughtless of escape or flight,
For Trojan men and Troy’s deep-bosom’d dames.”

To whom in answer Priam, godlike sire:
“Seek not to hinder me; nor be thyself
A bird of evil omen in my house;
For thou shalt not persuade me. If indeed
This message had been brought by mortal man,
Prophet, or seer, or sacrificing priest,
I should have deem’d it false, and laugh’d to scorn
The idle tale; but now (for I myself
Both saw and heard the Goddess) I must go;
Nor unfulfill’d shall be the words I speak:
And if indeed it be my fate to die
Beside the vessels of the brass-clad Greeks,
I am content! by fierce Achilles’ hand
Let me be slain, so once more in my arms
I hold my boy, and give my sorrow vent.”
Then raising up the coffer’s polish’d lid,
He chose twelve gorgeous shawls, twelve single cloaks.
As many rugs, as many splendid robes,
As many tunics; then of gold he took
Ten talents full; two tripods, burnish’d bright,
Four caldrons; then a cup of beauty rare,
A rich possession, which the men of Thrace
Had giv’n, when there he went ambassador;
E’en this he spar’d not, such his keen desire
His son to ransom. From the corridor
With angry words he drove the Trojans all:

“Out with ye, worthless rascals, vagabonds!
Have ye no griefs at home, that here ye come
To pester me? or is it not enough
That Jove with deep affliction visits me,
Slaying my bravest son? ye to your cost
Shall know his loss: since now that he is gone,
The Greeks shall find you easier far to slay.
But may my eyes be clos’d in death, ere see
The city sack’d, and utterly destroy’d.”

He said, and with his staff drove out the crowd;
Before the old man’s anger fled they all;
Then to his sons in threat’ning tone he cried;
To Paris, Helenus, and Agathon,
Pammon, Antiphonus, Polites brave,
Deiphobus, and bold Hippothous,
And godlike Dius; all these nine with threats
And angry taunts the aged sire assail’d:
“Haste, worthless sons, my scandal and my shame!
Would that ye all beside the Grecian ships
In Hector’s stead had died! Oh woe is me,
Who have begotten sons, in all the land
The best and bravest; now remains not one;
Mestor, and Troilus, dauntless charioteer,
And Hector, who a God ’mid men appear’d,
Nor like a mortal’s offspring, but a God’s:
All these hath Mars cut off; and left me none,
None but the vile and refuse; liars all,
Vain skipping coxcombs, in the dance alone,
And in nought else renown’d; base plunderers,
From their own countrymen, of lambs and kids.
When, laggards, will ye harness me the car
Equipp’d with all things needed for the way?”

He said; they quail’d beneath their father’s wrath,
And brought the smoothly-running mule-wain out,
Well-fram’d, new-built; and fix’d the wicker seat;
Then from the peg the mule-yoke down they took,
Of boxwood wrought, with boss and rings complete;
And with the yoke, the yoke-band brought they forth,
Nine cubits long; and to the polish’d pole
At the far end attach’d; the breast-rings then
Fix’d to the pole-piece: and on either side
Thrice round the knob the leathern thong they wound.
And bound it fast, and inward turn’d the tongue.
Then the rich ransom, from the chambers brought,
Of Hector’s head, upon the wain they pil’d;
And yok’d the strong-hoof’d mules, to harness train’d,
The Mysians’ splendid present to the King:
To Priam’s car they harness’d then the steeds,
Which he himself at polish’d manger fed.

Deep thoughts revolving, in the lofty halls
Were met the herald and the aged King,
When Hecuba with troubled mind drew near;
In her right hand a golden cup she bore
Of luscious wine, that ere they took their way
They to the Gods might due libations pour;
Before the car she stood, and thus she spoke:
“Take, and to father Jove thine off’ring pour,
And pray that he may bring thee safely home
From all thy foes; since sore against my will
Thou needs wilt venture to the ships of Greece.
Then to Idaean Jove, the cloud-girt son
Of Saturn, who th’ expanse of Troy surveys,
Prefer thy pray’r, beseeching him to send,
On thy right hand, a winged messenger,
The bird he loves the best, of strongest flight;
That thou thyself mayst see and know the sign,
And, firm in faith, approach the ships of Greece.
But should all-seeing Jove the sign withhold,
Then not with my consent shouldst thou attempt,
Whate’er thy wish, to reach the Grecian ships.”

To whom, in answer, godlike Priam thus:
“O woman, I refuse not to obey
Thy counsel; good it is to raise the hands
In pray’r to Heav’n, and Jove’s protection seek.”
The old man said; and bade th’ attendant pour
Pure water on his hands; with ewer she,
And basin, stood beside him: from his wife,
The due ablutions made, he took the cup;
Then in the centre of the court he stood,
And as he pour’d the wine, look’d up to Heav’n,
And thus with voice uplifted pray’d aloud:
“O father Jove, who rul’st on Ida’s height,
Most great, most glorious! grant that I may find
Some pity in Achilles’ heart; and send,
On my right hand, a winged messenger,
The bird thou lov’st the best, of strongest flight,
That I myself may see and know the sign,
And, firm in faith, approach the ships of Greece.”

Thus as he pray’d, the Lord of counsel heard;
And sent forthwith an eagle, feather’d king,
Dark bird of chase, and Dusky thence surnam’d:
Wide as the portals, well secur’d with bolts,
That guard some wealthy monarch’s lofty hall,
On either side his ample pinions spread.
On the right hand appear’d he, far above
The city soaring; they the fav’ring sign
With joy beheld, and ev’ry heart was cheer’d.
Mounting his car in haste, the aged King
Drove thro’ the court, and thro’ the echoing porch;
The mules in front, by sage Idaeus driv’n,
That drew the four-wheel’d wain; behind them came
The horses, down the city’s steep descent
Urg’d by th’ old man to speed; the crowd of friends
That follow’d mourn’d for him, as doom’d to death.
Descended from the city to the plain,
His sons and sons-in-law to Ilium took
Their homeward way; advancing o’er the plain
They two escap’d not Jove’s all-seeing eye;
Pitying he saw the aged sire; and thus
At once to Hermes spoke, his much-lov’d son:
“Hermes, for thou in social converse lov’st
To mix with men, and hear’st whome’er thou wilt;
Haste thee, and Priam to the Grecian ships
So lead, that none of all the Greeks may see
Ere at Achilles’ presence he attain.”

He said; nor disobey’d the heav’nly Guide;
His golden sandals on his feet he bound,
Ambrosial work; which bore him o’er the waves,
Swift as the wind, and o’er the wide-spread earth;
Then took his rod, wherewith he seals at will
The eyes of men, and wakes again from sleep.
This in his hand he bore, and sprang for flight.
Soon the wide Hellespont he reach’d, and Troy,
And pass’d in likeness of a princely youth,
In op’ning manhood, fairest term of life.

The twain had pass’d by Ilus’ lofty tomb,
And halted there the horses and the mules
Beside the margin of the stream to drink;
For darkness now was creeping o’er the earth:
When through the gloom the herald Hermes saw
Approaching near, to Priam thus he cried:
“O son of Dardanus, bethink thee well;
Of prudent counsel great is now our need.
A man I see, and fear he means us ill.
Say, with the horses shall we fly at once,
Or clasp his knees, and for his mercy sue?”
The old man heard, his mind confus’d with dread;
So grievously he fear’d, that ev’ry hair
Upon his bended limbs did stand on end;
He stood astounded; but the Guardian-God
Approach’d, and took him by the hand, and said:
“Where, father, goest thou thus with horse and mule
In the still night, when men are sunk in sleep?
And fear’st thou not the slaughter-breathing Greeks,
Thine unrelenting foes, and they so near?
If any one of them should see thee now,
So richly laden in the gloom of night,
How wouldst thou feel? thou art not young thyself,
And this old man, thy comrade, would avail
But little to protect thee from assault.
I will not harm thee, nay will shield from harm,
For like my father’s is, methinks, thy face.”

To whom in answer Priam, godlike sire:
“’Tis as thou say’st, fair son; yet hath some God
Extended o’er me his protecting hand,
Who sends me such a guide, so opportune.
Bless’d are thy parents in a son so grac’d
In face and presence, and of mind so wise.”

To whom in answer thus the Guardian-God:
“O father, well and wisely dost thou speak;
But tell me this, and truly: dost thou bear
These wealthy treasures to some foreign land,
That they for thee in safety may be stor’d?
Or have ye all resolv’d to fly from Troy
In fear, your bravest slain, thy gallant son,
Who never from the Greeks’ encounter flinch’d?”

To whom in answer Priam, godlike sire:
“Who art thou, noble Sir, and what thy race,
That speak’st thus fairly of my hapless son?”

To whom in answer thus the Guardian-God:
“Try me, old man; of godlike Hector ask;
For often in the glory-giving fight
These eyes have seen him; chief, when to the ships
The Greeks he drove, and with the sword destroy’d.
We gaz’d in wonder; from the fight restrain’d
By Peleus’ son, with Agamemnon wroth.
His follower I; one ship convey’d us both;
One of the Myrmidons I am; my sire
Polyctor, rich, but aged, e’en as thou.
Six sons he hath, besides myself, the sev’nth;
And I by lot was drafted for the war.
I from the ships am to the plain come forth;
For with the dawn of day the keen-ey’d Greeks
Will round the city marshal their array.
They chafe in idleness; the chiefs in vain
Strive to restrain their ardour for the fight.”

To whom in answer Priam, godlike sire:
“If of Achilles, Peleus’ son, thou art
Indeed a follower, tell me all the truth;
Lies yet my son beside the Grecian ships,
Or hath Achilles torn him limb from limb,
And to his dogs the mangled carcase giv’n?”

To whom in answer thus the Guardian-God:
“On him, old man, nor dogs nor birds have fed,
But by the ship of Peleus’ son he lies
Within the tent; twelve days he there hath lain,
Nor hath corruption touch’d his flesh, nor worms,
That wont to prey on men in battle slain.
The corpse, indeed, with each returning morn,
Around his comrade’s tomb Achilles drags,
Yet leaves it still uninjur’d; thou thyself
Mightst see how fresh, as dew-besprent, he lies,
From blood-stains cleans’d, and clos’d his many wounds,
For many a lance was buried in his corpse.
So, e’en in death, the blessed Gods above,
Who lov’d him well, protect thy noble son.”

He said; th’ old man rejoicing heard his words,
And answer’d, “See, my son, how good it is
To give th’ immortal Gods their tribute due;
For never did my son, while yet he liv’d,
Neglect the Gods who on Olympus dwell;
And thence have they remember’d him in death.
Accept, I pray, this goblet rich-emboss’d;
Be thou my guard, and, under Heav’n, my guide,
Until I reach the tent of Peleus’ son.”

To whom in answer thus the Guardian-God:
“Old father, me thy younger wouldst thou tempt,
In vain; who bidd’st me at thy hands accept
Thy proffer’d presents, to Achilles’ wrong.
I dread his anger; and should hold it shame
To plunder him, through fear of future ill.
But, as thy guide, I could conduct thee safe,
As far as Argos, journeying by thy side,
On ship-board or on foot; nor by the fault
Of thy conductor shouldst thou meet with harm.”

Thus spoke the Guardian-God, and on the car
Mounting in haste, he took the whip and reins,
And with fresh vigour mules and horses fill’d.
When to the ship-tow’rs and the trench they came,
The guard had late been busied with their meal;
And with deep sleep the heav’nly Guide o’erspread
The eyes of all; then open’d wide the gates,
And push’d aside the bolts, and led within
Both Priam, and the treasure-laden wain.
But when they reach’d Achilles’ lofty tent,
(Which for their King the Myrmidons had built
Of fir-trees fell’d, and overlaid the roof
With rushes mown from off the neighb’ring mead;
And all around a spacious court enclos’d
With cross-set palisades; a single bar
Of fir the gateway guarded, which to shut
Three men, of all the others, scarce suffic’d,
And three to open; but Achilles’ hand
Unaided shut with ease the massive bar)
Then for the old man Hermes op’d the gate,
And brought within the court the gifts design’d
For Peleus’ godlike son; then from the car
Sprang to the ground, and thus to Priam spoke:
“Old man, a God hath hither been thy guide;
Hermes I am, and sent to thee from Jove,
Father of all, to bring thee safely here.
I now return, nor to Achilles’ eyes
Will I appear; beseems it not a God
To greet a mortal in the sight of all.
But go thou in, and clasp Achilles’ knees,
And supplicate him for his father’s sake,
His fair-hair’d mother’s, and his child’s, that so
Thy words may stir an answer in his heart.”

Thus saying, Hermes to Olympus’ heights
Return’d; and Priam from his chariot sprang,
And left Idaeus there, in charge to keep
The horses and the mules, while he himself
Enter’d the dwelling straight, where wont to sit
Achilles, lov’d of Heav’n. The chief he found
Within, his followers seated all apart;
Two only in his presence minister’d,
The brave Automedon, and Alcimus,
A warrior bold; scarce ended the repast
Of food and wine; the table still was set.
Great Priam enter’d, unperceiv’d of all;
And standing by Achilles, with his arms
Embrac’d his knees, and kiss’d those fearful hands,
Blood-stain’d, which many of his sons had slain.
As when a man, by cruel fate pursued,
In his own land hath shed another’s blood,
And flying, seeks beneath some wealthy house
A foreign refuge; wond’ring, all behold:
On godlike Priam so with wonder gaz’d
Achilles; wonder seiz’d th’ attendants all,
And one to other looked; then Priam thus
To Peleus’ son his suppliant speech address’d:
“Think, great Achilles, rival of the Gods,
Upon thy father, e’en as I myself
Upon the threshold of unjoyous age:
And haply he, from them that dwell around
May suffer wrong, with no protector near
To give him aid; yet he, rejoicing, knows
That thou still liv’st; and day by day may hope
To see his son returning safe from Troy;
While I, all hapless, that have many sons,
The best and bravest through the breadth of Troy,
Begotten, deem that none are left me now.
Fifty there were, when came the sons of Greece;
Nineteen the offspring of a single womb;
The rest, the women of my household bore.
Of these have many by relentless Mars
Been laid in dust; but he, my only one,
The city’s and his brethren’s sole defence,
He, bravely fighting in his country’s cause,
Hector, but lately by thy hand hath fall’n:
On his behalf I venture to approach
The Grecian ships; for his release to thee
To make my pray’r, and priceless ransom pay.
Then thou, Achilles, reverence the Gods;
And, for thy father’s sake, look pitying down
On me, more needing pity; since I bear
Such grief as never man on earth hath borne.
Who stoop to kiss the hand that slew my son.”

Thus as he spoke, within Achilles’ breast
Fond mem’ry of his father rose; he touch’d
The old man’s hand, and gently put him by;
Then wept they both, by various mem’ries stirr’d:
One, prostrate at Achilles’ feet, bewail’d
His warrior son; Achilles for his sire,
And for Patroclus wept, his comrade dear;
And through the house their weeping loud was heard.
But when Achilles had indulg’d his grief,
And eas’d the yearning of his heart and limbs,
Uprising, with his hand the aged sire,
Pitying his hoary head and hoary beard,
He rais’d, and thus with gentle words address’d:

“Alas, what sorrows, poor old man, are thine!
How couldst thou venture to the Grecian ships
Alone, and to the presence of the man
Whose hand hath slain so many of thy sons,
Many and brave? an iron heart is thine!
But sit thou on this seat; and in our hearts,
Though filled with grief, let us that grief suppress;
For woful lamentation nought avails.
Such, is the thread the Gods for mortals spin,
To live in woe, while they from cares are free.
Two coffers lie beside the door of Jove,
With gifts for man: one good, the other ill;
To whom from each the Lord of lightning gives,
Him sometimes evil, sometimes good befalls;
To whom the ill alone, him foul disgrace
And grinding mis’ry o’er the earth pursue:
By God and man alike despis’d he roams.
Thus from his birth the Gods to Peleus gave
Excellent gifts; with wealth and substance bless’d
Above his fellows; o’er the Myrmidons
He rul’d with sov’reign sway; and Heav’n bestow’d
On him, a mortal, an immortal bride.
Yet this of ill was mingled in his lot,
That in his house no rising race he saw
Of future Kings; one only son he had,
One doom’d to early death; nor is it mine
To tend my father’s age; but far from home
Thee and thy sons in Troy I vex with war.
Much have we heard too of thy former wealth;
Above what Lesbos northward, Macar’s seat,
Contains, and Upper Phrygia, and the shores
Of boundless Hellespont, ’tis said that thou
In wealth and number of thy sons wast bless’d.
But since on thee this curse the Gods have brought,
Still round thy city war and murder rage.
Bear up, nor thus with grief incessant mourn;
Vain is thy sorrow for thy gallant son;
Thou canst not raise him, and mayst suffer more.”

To whom in answer Priam, godlike sire;
“Tell me not yet, illustrious chief, to sit,
While Hector lies, uncar’d for, in the tent;
But let me quickly go, that with mine eyes
I may behold my son; and thou accept
The ample treasures which we tender thee:
Mayst thou enjoy them, and in safety reach
Thy native land, since thou hast spar’d my life,
And bidd’st me still behold the light of Heav’n.”

To whom Achilles thus with stern regard:
“Old man, incense me not; I mean myself
To give thee back thy son; for here of late
Despatch’d by Jove, my Goddess-mother came,
The daughter of the aged Ocean-God:
And thee too, Priam, well I know, some God
(I cannot err) hath guided to our ships.
No mortal, though in vent’rous youth, would dare
Our camp to enter; nor could hope to pass
Unnotic’d by the watch, nor easily
Remove the pond’rous bar that guards our doors.
But stir not up my anger in my grief;
Lest, suppliant though thou be, within my tent
I brook thee not, and Jove’s command transgress.”

He said; the old man trembled, and obey’d;
Then to the door-way, with a lion’s spring,
Achilles rush’d; not unaccompanied;
With him Automedon and Alcimus,
His two attendants, of his followers all,
Next to the lost Patroclus, best-esteem’d;
They from the yoke the mules and horses loos’d;
Then led the herald of the old man in,
And bade him sit; and from the polish’d wain
The costly ransom took of Hector’s head.
Two robes they left, and one well-woven vest,
To clothe the corpse, and send with honour home.
Then to the female slaves he gave command
To wash the body, and anoint with oil,
Apart, that Priam might not see his son;
Lest his griev’d heart its passion unrestrain’d
Should utter, and Achilles, rous’d to wrath,
His suppliant slay, and Jove’s command transgress.
When they had wash’d the body, and with oil
Anointed, and around it wrapp’d the robe
And vest, Achilles lifted up the dead
With his own hands, and laid him on the couch;
Which to the polish’d wain his followers rais’d.
Then groaning, on his friend by name he call’d:
“Forgive, Patroclus! be not wroth with me,
If in the realm of darkness thou shouldst hear
That godlike Hector to his father’s arms,
For no mean ransom, I restore; whereof
A fitting share for thee I set aside.”

This said, Achilles to the tent return’d;
On the carv’d couch, from whence he rose, he sat
Beside the wall; and thus to Priam spoke:

“Old man, thy son, according to thy pray’r,
Is giv’n thee back; upon the couch he lies;
Thyself shalt see him at the dawn of day.
Meanwhile the ev’ning meal demands our care.
Not fair-hair’d Niobe abstain’d from food
When in the house her children lay in death,
Six beauteous daughters and six stalwart sons.
The youths, Apollo with his silver bow,
The maids, the Archer-Queen, Diana, slew,
With anger fill’d that Niobe presum’d
Herself with fair Latona to compare,
Her many children with her rival’s two;
So by the two were all the many slain.
Nine days in death they lay; and none was there
To pay their fun’ral rites; for Saturn’s son
Had given to all the people hearts of stone.
At length th’ immortal Gods entomb’d the dead.
Nor yet did Niobe, when now her grief
Had worn itself in tears, from food refrain.
And now in Sipylus, amid the rocks,
And lonely mountains, where the Goddess nymphs
That love to dance by Achelous’ stream,
’Tis said, were cradled, she, though turn’d to stone,
Broods o’er the wrongs inflicted by the Gods.
So we too, godlike sire, the meal may share;
And later, thou thy noble son mayst mourn,
To Troy restor’d—well worthy he thy tears.”

This said, he slaughter’d straight a white-fleec’d sheep;
His comrades then the carcase flay’d and dress’d:
The meat prepar’d, and fasten’d to the spits;
Roasted with care, and from the fire withdrew.
The bread Automedon from baskets fair
Apportion’d out; the meat Achilles shar’d.
They on the viands set before them fell.
The rage of thirst and hunger satisfied,
In wonder Priam on Achilles gaz’d,
His form and stature; as a God he seem’d;
And he too look’d on Priam, and admir’d
His venerable face, and gracious speech.
With mutual pleasure each on other gaz’d,
Till godlike Priam first address’d his host:

“Dismiss me now, illustrious chief, to rest;
And lie we down, in gentle slumbers wrapp’d;
For never have mine eyes been clos’d in sleep,
Since by thy hand my gallant son was slain:
But groaning still, I brood upon my woes,
And in my court with dust my head defile.
Now have I tasted bread, now ruddy wine
Hath o’er my palate pass’d; but not till now.”

Thus he; his comrades and th’ attendant maids
Achilles order’d in the corridor
Two mattresses to place, with blankets fair
Of purple wool o’erlaid; and on the top
Rugs and soft sheets for upper cov’ring spread.
They from the chamber, torch in hand, withdrew,
And with obedient haste two beds prepar’d.
Then thus Achilles spoke in jesting tone:
“Thou needs must sleep without, my good old friend;
Lest any leader of the Greeks should come,
As is their custom, to confer with me;
Of them whoe’er should find thee here by night
Forthwith to Agamemnon would report,
And Hector might not be so soon, restor’d.
But tell me truly this; how many days
For godlike Hector’s fun’ral rites ye need;
That for so long a time I may myself
Refrain from combat, and the people stay.”

To whom in answer Priam, godlike sire:
“If by thy leave we may indeed perform
His fun’ral rites, to thee, Achilles, great
Will be our gratitude, if this thou grant.
Thou know’st how close the town is hemm’d around;
And from the mountain, distant as it is,
The Trojans well may fear to draw the wood.
Nine days to public mourning would we give;
The tenth, to fun’ral rites and fun’ral feast;
Then on th’ eleventh would we raise his mound;
The twelfth, renew the war, if needs we must.”

To whom Achilles swift of foot replied:
“So shall it be, old Priam; I engage
To stay the battle for the time requir’d.”

Thus speaking, with his hand the old man’s wrist
He grasp’d, in token that he need not fear.
Then in the corridor lay down to rest
Old Priam and the herald, Elders sage;
While in his tent’s recess Achilles slept,
The fair Briseis resting by his side.

In night-long slumbers lay the other Gods,
And helmed chiefs, by gentle sleep subdued;
But on the eyes of Hermes, Guardian-God,
No slumber fell, deep pond’ring in his mind
How from the ships in safety to conduct
The royal Priam, and the guard elude.
Above the sleeper’s head he stood, and cried:
“Old man, small heed thou tak’st of coming ill,
Who, when Achilles gives thee leave to go,
Sleep’st undisturb’d, surrounded by thy foes.
Thy son hath been restor’d, and thou hast paid
A gen’rous price; but to redeem thy life,
If Agamemnon and the other Greeks
Should know that thou art here, full thrice so much
Thy sons, who yet are left, would have to pay.”

He said; the old man trembled, and arous’d
The herald; while the horses and the mules
Were yok’d by Hermes, who with silent speed
Drove through th’ encampment, unobserv’d of all.
But when they came to eddying Xanthus’ ford,
Fair-flowing stream, born of immortal Jove,
To high Olympus Hermes took his flight,
As morn, in saffron robe, o’er all the earth
Was light diffusing; they with fun’ral wail
Drove cityward the horses; following came
The mules that drew the litter of the dead.
The plain they travers’d o’er, observ’d of none,
Or man or woman, till Cassandra, fair
As golden Venus, from the topmost height
Of Pergamus, her father in his car
Upstanding saw, the herald at his side.
Him too she saw, who on the litter lay;
Then lifted up her voice, and cried aloud
To all the city, “Hither, Trojans, come,
Both men and women, Hector see restor’d;
If, while he liv’d, returning from the fight,
Ye met him e’er rejoicing, who indeed
Was all the city’s chiefest joy and pride.”

She said; nor man nor woman then was left
Within the city; o’er the minds of all
Grief pass’d, resistless; to the gates in throngs
They press’d, to crowd round him who brought the dead.
The first to clasp the body were his wife
And honour’d mother; eagerly they sprang
On the smooth-rolling wain, to touch the head
Of Hector; round them, weeping, stood the crowd
Weeping, till sunset, all the live-long day
Had they before the gates for Hector mourn’d;
Had not old Priam from the car address’d
The crowd: “Make way, that so the mules may pass;
When to my house I shall have brought my dead,
Ye there may vent your sorrow as ye will.”

Thus as he spoke, obedient to his word
They stood aside, and for the car made way:
But when to Priam’s lordly house they came,
They laid him on a rich-wrought couch, and call’d
The minstrels in, who by the hero’s bed
Should lead the melancholy chorus; they
Pour’d forth the music of the mournful dirge,
While women’s voices join’d in loud lament.
White-arm’d Andromache the wail began,
The head of Hector clasping in her hands:
“My husband, thou art gone in pride of youth,
And in thine house hast left me desolate;
Thy child an infant still, thy child and mine,
Unhappy parents both! nor dare I hope
That he may reach the ripeness of his youth;
For ere that day shall Troy in ruin fall,
Since thou art gone, her guardian! thou whose arm
Defended her, her wives, and helpless babes!
They now shall shortly o’er the sea be borne,
And with them I shall go; thou too, my child,
Must follow me, to servile labour doom’d,
The suff’ring victim of a tyrant Lord;
Unless perchance some angry Greek may seize
And dash thee from the tow’r—a woful death!
Whose brother, or whose father, or whose son
By Hector hath been slain; for many a Greek
By Hector’s hand hath bit the bloody dust;
Not light in battle was thy father’s hand!
Therefore for him the gen’ral city mourns;
Thou to thy parents bitter grief hast caus’d,
Hector! but bitt’rest grief of all hast left
To me! for not to me was giv’n to clasp
The hand extended from thy dying bed,
Nor words of wisdom catch, which night and day,
With tears, I might have treasur’d in my heart.”

Weeping she spoke—the women join’d the wail.
Then Hecuba took up the loud lament:
“Hector, of all my children dearest thou!
Dear to th’ Immortals too in life wast thou,
And they in death have borne thee still in mind;
For other of my sons, his captives made,
Across the wat’ry waste, to Samos’ isle
Or Imbros, or th’ inhospitable shore
Of Lemnos, hath Achilles, swift of foot,
To slav’ry sold; thee, when his sharp-edg’d spear
Had robb’d thee of thy life, he dragg’d indeed
Around Patroclus’ tomb, his comrade dear,
Whom thou hadst slain; yet so he rais’d not up
His dead to life again; now liest thou here,
All fresh and fair, as dew-besprent; like one
Whom bright Apollo, with his arrows keen,
God of the silver bow, hath newly slain.”

Weeping, she spoke; and rous’d the gen’ral grief.
Then Helen, third, the mournful strain renew’d:
“Hector, of all my brethren dearest thou!
True, godlike Paris claims me as his wife,
Who bore me hither—would I then had died!
But twenty years have pass’d since here I came,
And left my native land; yet ne’er from thee
I heard one scornful, one degrading word;
And when from others I have borne reproach,
Thy brothers, sisters, or thy brothers’ wives,
Or mother, (for thy sire was ever kind
E’en as a father) thou hast check’d them still
With tender feeling, and with gentle words.
For thee I weep, and for myself no less:
For, through the breadth of Troy, none love me now,
None kindly look on me, but all abhor.”

Weeping she spoke, and with her wept the crowd.
At length the aged Priam gave command:
“Haste now, ye Trojans, to the city bring
Good store of fuel; fear no treach’rous wile;
For when he sent me from the dark-ribb’d ships,
Achilles promis’d that from hostile arms
Till the twelfth morn we should no harm sustain.”

He said; and they the oxen and the mules
Yok’d to the wains, and from the city throng’d:
Nine days they labour’d, and brought back to Troy
Good store of wood; but when the tenth day’s light
Upon the earth appear’d, weeping, they bore
Brave Hector out; and on the fun’ral pile
Laying the glorious dead, applied the torch.

While yet the rosy-finger’d morn was young
Round noble Hector’s pyre the people press’d:
When all were gather’d round, and closely throng’d
First on the burning mass, as far as spread
The range of fire, they pour’d the ruddy wine,
And quench’d the flames: his brethren then and friends
Weeping, the hot tears flowing down their cheeks,
Collected from the pile the whiten’d bones;
These in a golden casket they enclos’d,
And o’er it spread soft shawls of purple dye;
Then in a grave they laid it, and in haste
With stone in pond’rous masses cover’d o’er;
And rais’d a mound, and watch’d on ev’ry side,
From sudden inroad of the Greeks to guard.
The mound erected, back they turn’d; and all
Assembled duly, shar’d the solemn feast
In Priam’s palace, Heav’n-descended King.

Such were the rites to glorious Hector paid.




The man for wisdom’s various arts renown’d,
Long exercised in woes, O Muse! resound;
Who, when his arms had wrought the destined fall
Of sacred Troy, and razed her heaven-built wall,
Wandering from clime to clime, observant stray’d,
Their manners noted, and their states survey’d,
On stormy seas unnumber’d toils he bore,
Safe with his friends to gain his natal shore:
Vain toils! their impious folly dared to prey
On herds devoted to the god of day;
The god vindictive doom’d them never more
(Ah, men unbless’d!) to touch that natal shore.
Oh, snatch some portion of these acts from fate,
Celestial Muse! and to our world relate.

Now at their native realms the Greeks arrived;
All who the wars of ten long years survived;
And ’scaped the perils of the gulfy main.
Ulysses, sole of all the victor train,
An exile from his dear paternal coast,
Deplored his absent queen and empire lost.
Calypso in her caves constrain’d his stay,
With sweet, reluctant, amorous delay;
In vain-for now the circling years disclose
The day predestined to reward his woes.
At length his Ithaca is given by fate,
Where yet new labours his arrival wait;
At length their rage the hostile powers restrain,
All but the ruthless monarch of the main.
But now the god, remote, a heavenly guest,
In Æthiopia graced the genial feast
(A race divided, whom with sloping rays
The rising and descending sun surveys);
There on the world’s extremest verge revered
With hecatombs and prayer in pomp preferr’d,
Distant he lay: while in the bright abodes
Of high Olympus, Jove convened the gods:
The assembly thus the sire supreme address’d,
AEgysthus’ fate revolving in his breast,
Whom young Orestes to the dreary coast
Of Pluto sent, a blood-polluted ghost.

“Perverse mankind! whose wills, created free,
Charge all their woes on absolute degree;
All to the dooming gods their guilt translate,
And follies are miscall’d the crimes of fate.
When to his lust AEgysthus gave the rein,
Did fate, or we, the adulterous act constrain?
Did fate, or we, when great Atrides died,
Urge the bold traitor to the regicide?
Hermes I sent, while yet his soul remain’d
Sincere from royal blood, and faith profaned;
To warn the wretch, that young Orestes, grown
To manly years, should re-assert the throne.
Yet, impotent of mind, and uncontroll’d,
He plunged into the gulf which Heaven foretold.”

Here paused the god; and pensive thus replies
Minerva, graceful with her azure eyes:

“O thou! from whom the whole creation springs,
The source of power on earth derived to kings!
His death was equal to the direful deed;
So may the man of blood be doomed to bleed!
But grief and rage alternate wound my breast
For brave Ulysses, still by fate oppress’d.
Amidst an isle, around whose rocky shore
The forests murmur, and the surges roar,
The blameless hero from his wish’d-for home
A goddess guards in her enchanted dome;
(Atlas her sire, to whose far-piercing eye
The wonders of the deep expanded lie;
The eternal columns which on earth he rears
End in the starry vault, and prop the spheres).
By his fair daughter is the chief confined,
Who soothes to dear delight his anxious mind;
Successless all her soft caresses prove,
To banish from his breast his country’s love;
To see the smoke from his loved palace rise,
While the dear isle in distant prospect lies,
With what contentment could he close his eyes!
And will Omnipotence neglect to save
The suffering virtue of the wise and brave?
Must he, whose altars on the Phrygian shore
With frequent rites, and pure, avow’d thy power,
Be doom’d the worst of human ills to prove,
Unbless’d, abandon’d to the wrath of Jove?”

“Daughter! what words have pass’d thy lips unweigh’d!
(Replied the Thunderer to the martial maid;)
Deem not unjustly by my doom oppress’d,
Of human race the wisest and the best.
Neptune, by prayer repentant rarely won,
Afflicts the chief, to avenge his giant son,
Whose visual orb Ulysses robb’d of light;
Great Polypheme, of more than mortal might?
Him young Thousa bore (the bright increase
Of Phorcys, dreaded in the sounds and seas);
Whom Neptune eyed with bloom of beauty bless’d,
And in his cave the yielding nymph compress’d
For this the god constrains the Greek to roam,
A hopeless exile from his native home,
From death alone exempt—but cease to mourn;
Let all combine to achieve his wish’d return;
Neptune atoned, his wrath shall now refrain,
Or thwart the synod of the gods in vain.”

“Father and king adored!” Minerva cried,
“Since all who in the Olympian bower reside
Now make the wandering Greek their public care,
Let Hermes to the Atlantic isle repair;
Bid him, arrived in bright Calypso’s court,
The sanction of the assembled powers report:
That wise Ulysses to his native land
Must speed, obedient to their high command.
Meantime Telemachus, the blooming heir
Of sea-girt Ithaca, demands my care;
’Tis mine to form his green, unpractised years
In sage debates; surrounded with his peers,
To save the state, and timely to restrain
The bold intrusion of the suitor-train;
Who crowd his palace, and with lawless power
His herds and flocks in feastful rites devour.
To distant Sparta, and the spacious waste
Of Sandy Pyle, the royal youth shall haste.
There, warm with filial love, the cause inquire
That from his realm retards his god-like sire;
Delivering early to the voice of fame
The promise of a green immortal name.”

She said: the sandals of celestial mould,
Fledged with ambrosial plumes, and rich with gold,
Surround her feet: with these sublime she sails
The aërial space, and mounts the winged gales;
O’er earth and ocean wide prepared to soar,
Her dreaded arm a beamy javelin bore,
Ponderous and vast: which, when her fury burns,
Proud tyrants humbles, and whole hosts o’erturns.
From high Olympus prone her flight she bends,
And in the realms of Ithaca descends,
Her lineaments divine, the grave disguise
Of Mentes’ form conceal’d from human eyes
(Mentes, the monarch of the Taphian land);
A glittering spear waved awful in her hand.
There in the portal placed, the heaven-born maid
Enormous riot and misrule survey’d.
On hides of beeves, before the palace gate
(Sad spoils of luxury), the suitors sate.
With rival art, and ardour in their mien,
At chess they vie, to captivate the queen;
Divining of their loves. Attending nigh,
A menial train the flowing bowl supply.
Others, apart, the spacious hall prepare,
And form the costly feast with busy care.
There young Telemachus, his bloomy face
Glowing celestial sweet, with godlike grace
Amid the circle shines: but hope and fear
(Painful vicissitude!) his bosom tear.
Now, imaged in his mind, he sees restored
In peace and joy the people’s rightful lord;
The proud oppressors fly the vengeful sword.
While his fond soul these fancied triumphs swell’d,
The stranger guest the royal youth beheld;
Grieved that a visitant so long should wait
Unmark’d, unhonour’d, at a monarch’s gate;
Instant he flew with hospitable haste,
And the new friend with courteous air embraced.
“Stranger, whoe’er thou art, securely rest,
Affianced in my faith, a ready guest;
Approach the dome, the social banquet share,
And then the purpose of thy soul declare.”

Thus affable and mild, the prince precedes,
And to the dome the unknown celestial leads.
The spear receiving from the hand, he placed
Against a column, fair with sculpture graced;
Where seemly ranged in peaceful order stood
Ulysses’ arms now long disused to blood.
He led the goddess to the sovereign seat,
Her feet supported with a stool of state
(A purple carpet spread the pavement wide);
Then drew his seat, familiar, to her side;
Far from the suitor-train, a brutal crowd,
With insolence, and wine, elate and loud:
Where the free guest, unnoted, might relate,
If haply conscious, of his father’s fate.
The golden ewer a maid obsequious brings,
Replenish’d from the cool, translucent springs;
With copious water the bright vase supplies
A silver laver of capacious size;
They wash. The tables in fair order spread,
They heap the glittering canisters with bread:
Viands of various kinds allure the taste,
Of choicest sort and savour, rich repast!
Delicious wines the attending herald brought;
The gold gave lustre to the purple draught.
Lured with the vapour of the fragrant feast,
In rush’d the suitors with voracious haste;
Marshall’d in order due, to each a sewer
Presents, to bathe his hands, a radiant ewer.
Luxurious then they feast. Observant round
Gay stripling youths the brimming goblets crown’d.
The rage of hunger quell’d, they all advance
And form to measured airs the mazy dance;
To Phemius was consign’d the chorded lyre,
Whose hand reluctant touch’d the warbling wire;
Phemius, whose voice divine could sweetest sing
High strains responsive to the vocal string.

Meanwhile, in whispers to his heavenly guest
His indignation thus the prince express’d:

“Indulge my rising grief, whilst these (my friend)
With song and dance the pompous revel end.
Light is the dance, and doubly sweet the lays,
When for the dear delight another pays.
His treasured stores those cormarants consume,
Whose bones, defrauded of a regal tomb
And common turf, lie naked on the plain,
Or doom’d to welter in the whelming main.
Should he return, that troop so blithe and bold,
With purple robes inwrought, and stiff with gold,
Precipitant in fear would wing their flight,
And curse their cumbrous pride’s unwieldy weight.
But ah, I dream!-the appointed hour is fled.
And hope, too long with vain delusion fed,
Deaf to the rumour of fallacious fame,
Gives to the roll of death his glorious name!
With venial freedom let me now demand
Thy name, thy lineage, and paternal land;
Sincere from whence began thy course, recite,
And to what ship I owe the friendly freight?
Now first to me this visit dost thou deign,
Or number’d in my father’s social train?
All who deserved his choice he made his own,
And, curious much to know, he far was known.”

“My birth I boast (the blue-eyed virgin cries)
From great Anchialus, renown’d and wise;
Mentes my name; I rule the Taphian race,
Whose bounds the deep circumfluent waves embrace;
A duteous people, and industrious isle,
To naval arts inured, and stormy toil.
Freighted with iron from my native land,
I steer my voyage to the Brutian strand
To gain by commerce, for the labour’d mass,
A just proportion of refulgent brass.
Far from your capital my ship resides
At Reitorus, and secure at anchor rides;
Where waving groves on airy Neign grow,
Supremely tall and shade the deeps below.
Thence to revisit your imperial dome,
An old hereditary guest I come;
Your father’s friend. Laertes can relate
Our faith unspotted, and its early date;
Who, press’d with heart-corroding grief and years,
To the gay court a rural shed prefers,
Where, sole of all his train, a matron sage
Supports with homely fond his drooping age,
With feeble steps from marshalling his vines
Returning sad, when toilsome day declines.

“With friendly speed, induced by erring fame,
To hail Ulysses’ safe return I came;
But still the frown of some celestial power
With envious joy retards the blissful hour.
Let not your soul be sunk in sad despair;
He lives, he breathes this heavenly vital air,
Among a savage race, whose shelfy bounds
With ceaseless roar the foaming deep surrounds.
The thoughts which roll within my ravish’d breast,
To me, no seer, the inspiring gods suggest;
Nor skill’d nor studious, with prophetic eye
To judge the winged omens of the sky.
Yet hear this certain speech, nor deem it vain;
Though adamantine bonds the chief restrain,
The dire restraint his wisdom will defeat,
And soon restore him to his regal seat.
But generous youth! sincere and free declare,
Are you, of manly growth, his royal heir?
For sure Ulysses in your look appears,
The same his features, if the same his years.
Such was that face, on which I dwelt with joy
Ere Greece assembled stemm’d the tides to Troy;
But, parting then for that detested shore,
Our eyes, unhappy never greeted more.”

“To prove a genuine birth (the prince replies)
On female truth assenting faith relies.
Thus manifest of right, I build my claim
Sure-founded on a fair maternal fame,
Ulysses’ son: but happier he, whom fate
Hath placed beneath the storms which toss the great!
Happier the son, whose hoary sire is bless’d
With humble affluence, and domestic rest!
Happier than I, to future empire born,
But doom’d a father’s wretch’d fate to mourn!”

To whom, with aspect mild, the guest divine:
“Oh true descendant of a sceptred line!
The gods a glorious fate from anguish free
To chaste Penelope’s increase decree.
But say, yon jovial troops so gaily dress’d,
Is this a bridal or a friendly feast?
Or from their deed I rightlier may divine,
Unseemly flown with insolence and wine?
Unwelcome revellers, whose lawless joy
Pains the sage ear, and hurts the sober eye.”

“Magnificence of old (the prince replied)
Beneath our roof with virtue could reside;
Unblamed abundance crowned the royal board,
What time this dome revered her prudent lord;
Who now (so Heaven decrees) is doom’d to mourn,
Bitter constraint, erroneous and forlorn.
Better the chief, on Ilion’s hostile plain,
Had fall’n surrounded with his warlike train;
Or safe return’d, the race of glory pass’d,
New to his friends’ embrace, and breathed his last!
Then grateful Greece with streaming eyes would raise,
Historic marbles to record his praise;
His praise, eternal on the faithful stone,
Had with transmissive honour graced his son.
Now snatch’d by harpies to the dreary coast.
Sunk is the hero, and his glory lost;
Vanish’d at once! unheard of, and unknown!
And I his heir in misery alone.
Nor for a dear lost father only flow
The filial tears, but woe succeeds to woe
To tempt the spouseless queen with amorous wiles
Resort the nobles from the neighbouring isles;
From Samos, circled with the Ionian main,
Dulichium, and Zacynthas’ sylvan reign;
Ev’n with presumptuous hope her bed to ascend,
The lords of Ithaca their right pretend.
She seems attentive to their pleaded vows,
Her heart detesting what her ear allows.
They, vain expectants of the bridal hour,
My stores in riotous expense devour.
In feast and dance the mirthful months employ,
And meditate my doom to crown their joy.”

With tender pity touch’d, the goddess cried:
“Soon may kind Heaven a sure relief provide,
Soon may your sire discharge the vengeance due,
And all your wrongs the proud oppressors rue!
Oh! in that portal should the chief appear,
Each hand tremendous with a brazen spear,
In radiant panoply his limbs incased
(For so of old my father’s court he graced,
When social mirth unbent his serious soul,
O’er the full banquet, and the sprightly bowl);
He then from Ephyre, the fair domain
Of Ilus, sprung from Jason’s royal strain,
Measured a length of seas, a toilsome length, in vain.
For, voyaging to learn the direful art
To taint with deadly drugs the barbed dart;
Observant of the gods, and sternly just,
Ilus refused to impart the baneful trust;
With friendlier zeal my father’s soul was fired,
The drugs he knew, and gave the boon desired.
Appear’d he now with such heroic port,
As then conspicuous at the Taphian court;
Soon should yon boasters cease their haughty strife,
Or each atone his guilty love with life.
But of his wish’d return the care resign,
Be future vengeance to the powers divine.
My sentence hear: with stern distaste avow’d,
To their own districts drive the suitor-crowd;
When next the morning warms the purple east,
Convoke the peerage, and the gods attest;
The sorrows of your inmost soul relate;
And form sure plans to save the sinking state.
Should second love a pleasing flame inspire,
And the chaste queen connubial rights require;
Dismiss’d with honour, let her hence repair
To great Icarius, whose paternal care
Will guide her passion, and reward her choice
With wealthy dower, and bridal gifts of price.
Then let this dictate of my love prevail:
Instant, to foreign realms prepare to sail,
To learn your father’s fortunes; Fame may prove,
Or omen’d voice (the messenger of Jove),
Propitious to the search. Direct your toil
Through the wide ocean first to sandy Pyle;
Of Nestor, hoary sage, his doom demand:
Thence speed your voyage to the Spartan strand;
For young Atrides to the Achaian coast
Arrived the last of all the victor host.
If yet Ulysses views the light, forbear,
Till the fleet hours restore the circling year.
But if his soul hath wing’d the destined flight,
Inhabitant of deep disastrous night;
Homeward with pious speed repass the main,
To the pale shade funereal rites ordain,
Plant the fair column o’er the vacant grave,
A hero’s honours let the hero have.
With decent grief the royal dead deplored,
For the chaste queen select an equal lord.
Then let revenge your daring mind employ,
By fraud or force the suitor train destroy,
And starting into manhood, scorn the boy.
Hast thou not heard how young Orestes, fired
With great revenge, immortal praise acquired?
His virgin-sword AEgysthus’ veins imbrued;
The murderer fell, and blood atoned for blood.
O greatly bless’d with every blooming grace!
With equal steps the paths of glory trace;
Join to that royal youth’s your rival name,
And shine eternal in the sphere of fame.
But my associates now my stay deplore,
Impatient on the hoarse-resounding shore.
Thou, heedful of advice, secure proceed;
My praise the precept is, be thine the deed.

“The counsel of my friend (the youth rejoin’d)
Imprints conviction on my grateful mind.
So fathers speak (persuasive speech and mild)
Their sage experience to the favourite child.
But, since to part, for sweet refection due,
The genial viands let my train renew;
And the rich pledge of plighted faith receive,
Worthy the heir of Ithaca to give.”

“Defer the promised boon (the goddess cries,
Celestial azure brightening in her eyes),
And let me now regain the Reithrian port;
From Temese return’d, your royal court
I shall revisit, and that pledge receive;
And gifts, memorial of our friendship, leave.”

Abrupt, with eagle-speed she cut the sky;
Instant invisible to mortal eye.
Then first he recognized the ethereal guest;
Wonder and joy alternate fire his breast;
Heroic thoughts, infused, his heart dilate;
Revolving much his father’s doubtful fate.
At length, composed, he join’d the suitor-throng;
Hush’d in attention to the warbled song.
His tender theme the charming lyrist chose.
Minerva’s anger, and the dreadful woes
Which voyaging from Troy the victors bore,
While storms vindictive intercept the store.
The shrilling airs the vaulted roof rebounds,
Reflecting to the queen the silver sounds.
With grief renew’d the weeping fair descends;
Their sovereign’s step a virgin train attends:
A veil, of richest texture wrought, she wears,
And silent to the joyous hall repairs.
There from the portal, with her mild command,
Thus gently checks the minstrel’s tuneful hand:

“Phemius! let acts of gods, and heroes old,
What ancient bards in hall and bower have told,
Attemper’d to the lyre, your voice employ;
Such the pleased ear will drink with silent joy.
But, oh! forbear that dear disastrous name,
To sorrow sacred, and secure of fame;
My bleeding bosom sickens at the sound,
And every piercing note inflicts a wound.”

“Why, dearest object of my duteous love,
(Replied the prince,) will you the bard reprove?
Oft, Jove’s ethereal rays (resistless fire)
The chanter’s soul and raptured song inspire
Instinct divine? nor blame severe his choice,
Warbling the Grecian woes with heart and voice;
For novel lays attract our ravish’d ears;
But old, the mind with inattention hears:
Patient permit the sadly pleasing strain;
Familiar now with grief, your tears refrain,
And in the public woe forget your own;
You weep not for a perish’d lord alone.
What Greeks new wandering in the Stygian gloom,
Wish your Ulysses shared an equal doom!
Your widow’d hours, apart, with female toil
And various labours of the loom beguile;
There rule, from palace-cares remote and free;
That care to man belongs, and most to me.”

Mature beyond his years, the queen admires
His sage reply, and with her train retires.
Then swelling sorrows burst their former bounds,
With echoing grief afresh the dome resounds;
Till Pallas, piteous of her plaintive cries,
In slumber closed her silver-streaming eyes.

Meantime, rekindled at the royal charms,
Tumultuous love each beating bosom warms;
Intemperate rage a wordy war began;
But bold Telemachus assumed the man.
“Instant (he cried) your female discord end,
Ye deedless boasters! and the song attend;
Obey that sweet compulsion, nor profane
With dissonance the smooth melodious strain.
Pacific now prolong the jovial feast;
But when the dawn reveals the rosy east,
I, to the peers assembled, shall propose
The firm resolve, I here in few disclose;
No longer live the cankers of my court;
All to your several states with speed resort;
Waste in wild riot what your land allows,
There ply the early feast, and late carouse.
But if, to honour lost, ’tis still decreed
For you my bowl shall flow, my flock shall bleed;
Judge and revenge my right, impartial Jove!
By him and all the immortal thrones above
(A sacred oath), each proud oppressor slain,
Shall with inglorious gore this marble stain.”

Awed by the prince, thus haughty, bold, and young,
Rage gnaw’d the lip, and wonder chain’d the tongue.
Silence at length the gay Antinous broke,
Constrain’d a smile, and thus ambiguous spoke:
“What god to your untutor’d youth affords
This headlong torrent of amazing words?
May Jove delay thy reign, and cumber late
So bright a genius with the toils of state!”

“Those toils (Telemachus serene replies)
Have charms, with all their weight, t’allure the wise.
Fast by the throne obsequious fame resides,
And wealth incessant rolls her golden tides.
Nor let Antinous rage, if strong desire
Of wealth and fame a youthful bosom fire:
Elect by Jove, his delegate of sway,
With joyous pride the summons I’d obey.
Whene’er Ulysses roams the realm of night,
Should factious power dispute my lineal right,
Some other Greeks a fairer claim may plead;
To your pretence their title would precede.
At least, the sceptre lost, I still should reign
Sole o’er my vassals, and domestic train.”

To this Eurymachus: “To Heaven alone
Refer the choice to fill the vacant throne.
Your patrimonial stores in peace possess;
Undoubted, all your filial claim confess:
Your private right should impious power invade,
The peers of Ithaca would arm in aid.
But say, that stranger guest who late withdrew,
What and from whence? his name and lineage shew.
His grave demeanour and majestic grace
Speak him descended of no vulgar race:
Did he some loan of ancient right require,
Or came forerunner of your sceptr’d sire?”

“Oh son of Polybus!” the prince replies,
“No more my sire will glad these longing eyes;
The queen’s fond hope inventive rumour cheers,
Or vain diviners’ dreams divert her fears.
That stranger-guest the Taphian realm obeys,
A realm defended with encircling seas.
Mentes, an ever-honour’d name, of old
High in Ulysses’ social list enroll’d.”

Thus he, though conscious of the ethereal guest,
Answer’d evasive of the sly request.
Meantime the lyre rejoins the sprightly lay;
Love-dittied airs, and dance, conclude the day
But when the star of eve with golden light
Adorn’d the matron brow of sable night,
The mirthful train dispersing quit the court,
And to their several domes to rest resort.
A towering structure to the palace join’d;
To this his steps the thoughtful prince inclined:
In his pavilion there, to sleep repairs;
The lighted torch, the sage Euryclea bears
(Daughter of Ops, the just Pisenor’s son,
For twenty beeves by great Laertes won;
In rosy prime with charms attractive graced,
Honour’d by him, a gentle lord and chaste,
With dear esteem: too wise, with jealous strife
To taint the joys of sweet connubial life.
Sole with Telemachus her service ends,
A child she nursed him, and a man attends).
Whilst to his couch himself the prince address’d,
The duteous dame received the purple vest;
The purple vest with decent care disposed,
The silver ring she pull’d, the door reclosed,
The bolt, obedient to the silken cord,
To the strong staple’s inmost depth restored,
Secured the valves. There, wrapped in silent shade,
Pensive, the rules the goddess gave he weigh’d;
Stretch’d on the downy fleece, no rest he knows,
And in his raptured soul the vision glows.





Now reddening from the dawn, the morning ray
Glow’d in the front of heaven, and gave the day
The youthful hero, with returning light,
Rose anxious from the inquietudes of night.
A royal robe he wore with graceful pride,
A two-edged falchion threaten’d by his side,
Embroider’d sandals glitter’d as he trod,
And forth he moved, majestic as a god.
Then by his heralds, restless of delay,
To council calls the peers: the peers obey.
Soon as in solemn form the assembly sate,
From his high dome himself descends in state.
Bright in his hand a ponderous javelin shined;
Two dogs, a faithful guard, attend behind;
Pallas with grace divine his form improves,
And gazing crowds admire him as he moves,

His father’s throne he fill’d; while distant stood
The hoary peers, and aged wisdom bow’d.

’Twas silence all. At last AEgyptius spoke;
AEgyptius, by his age and sorrow broke;
A length of days his soul with prudence crown’d,
A length of days had bent him to the ground.
His eldest hope in arms to Ilion came,
By great Ulysses taught the path to fame;
But (hapless youth) the hideous Cyclops tore
His quivering limbs, and quaff’d his spouting gore.
Three sons remain’d; to climb with haughty fires
The royal bed, Eurynomus aspires;
The rest with duteous love his griefs assuage,
And ease the sire of half the cares of age.
Yet still his Antiphus he loves, he mourns,
And, as he stood, he spoke and wept by turns,

“Since great Ulysses sought the Phrygian plains,
Within these walls inglorious silence reigns.
Say then, ye peers! by whose commands we meet?
Why here once more in solemn council sit?
Ye young, ye old, the weighty cause disclose:
Arrives some message of invading foes?
Or say, does high necessity of state
Inspire some patriot, and demand debate?
The present synod speaks its author wise;
Assist him, Jove, thou regent of the skies!”

He spoke. Telemachus with transport glows,
Embraced the omen, and majestic rose
(His royal hand the imperial sceptre sway’d);
Then thus, addressing to AEgyptius, said:

“Reverend old man! lo here confess’d he stands
By whom ye meet; my grief your care demands.
No story I unfold of public woes,
Nor bear advices of impending foes:
Peace the blest land, and joys incessant crown:
Of all this happy realm, I grieve alone.
For my lost sire continual sorrows spring,
The great, the good; your father and your king.
Yet more; our house from its foundation bows,
Our foes are powerful, and your sons the foes;
Hither, unwelcome to the queen, they come;
Why seek they not the rich Icarian dome?
If she must wed, from other hands require
The dowry: is Telemachus her sire?
Yet through my court the noise of revel rings,
And waste the wise frugality of kings.
Scarce all my herds their luxury suffice;
Scarce all my wine their midnight hours supplies.
Safe in my youth, in riot still they grow,
Nor in the helpless orphan dread a foe.
But come it will, the time when manhood grants
More powerful advocates than vain complaints.
Approach that hour! insufferable wrong
Cries to the gods, and vengeance sleeps too long.
Rise then, ye peers! with virtuous anger rise;
Your fame revere, but most the avenging skies.
By all the deathless powers that reign above,
By righteous Themis and by thundering Jove
(Themis, who gives to councils, or denies
Success; and humbles, or confirms the wise),
Rise in my aid! suffice the tears that flow
For my lost sire, nor add new woe to woe.
If e’er he bore the sword to strengthen ill,
Or, having power to wrong, betray’d the will,
On me, on me your kindled wrath assuage,
And bid the voice of lawless riot rage.
If ruin to your royal race ye doom,
Be you the spoilers, and our wealth consume.
Then might we hope redress from juster laws,
And raise all Ithaca to aid our cause:
But while your sons commit the unpunish’d wrong,
You make the arm of violence too strong.”

While thus he spoke, with rage and grief he frown’d,
And dash’d the imperial sceptre to the ground.
The big round tear hung trembling in his eye:
The synod grieved, and gave a pitying sigh,
Then silent sate—at length Antinous burns
With haughty rage, and sternly thus returns:

“O insolence of youth! whose tongue affords
Such railing eloquence, and war of words.
Studious thy country’s worthies to defame,
Thy erring voice displays thy mother’s shame.
Elusive of the bridal day, she gives
Fond hopes to all, and all with hopes deceives.
Did not the sun, through heaven’s wide azure roll’d,
For three long years the royal fraud behold?
While she, laborious in delusion, spread
The spacious loom, and mix’d the various thread:
Where as to life the wondrous figures rise,
Thus spoke the inventive queen, with artful sighs:

“Though cold in death Ulysses breathes no more,
Cease yet awhile to urge the bridal hour:
Cease, till to great Laertes I bequeath
A task of grief, his ornaments of death.
Lest when the Fates his royal ashes claim,
The Grecian matrons taint my spotless fame;
When he, whom living mighty realms obey’d,
Shall want in death a shroud to grace his shade.’

“Thus she: at once the generous train complies,
Nor fraud mistrusts in virtue’s fair disguise.
The work she plied; but, studious of delay,
By night reversed the labours of the day.
While thrice the sun his annual journey made,
The conscious lamp the midnight fraud survey’d;
Unheard, unseen, three years her arts prevail;
The fourth her maid unfolds the amazing tale.
We saw, as unperceived we took our stand,
The backward labours of her faithless hand.
Then urged, she perfects her illustrious toils;
A wondrous monument of female wiles!

“But you, O peers! and thou, O prince! give ear
(I speak aloud, that every Greek may hear):
Dismiss the queen; and if her sire approves
Let him espouse her to the peer she loves:
Bid instant to prepare the bridal train,
Nor let a race of princes wait in vain.
Though with a grace divine her soul is blest,
And all Minerva breathes within her breast,
In wondrous arts than woman more renown’d,
And more than woman with deep wisdom crown’d;
Though Tyro nor Mycene match her name,
Not great Alcmena (the proud boasts of fame);
Yet thus by heaven adorn’d, by heaven’s decree
She shines with fatal excellence, to thee:
With thee, the bowl we drain, indulge the feast,
Till righteous heaven reclaim her stubborn breast.
What though from pole to pole resounds her name!
The son’s destruction waits the mother’s fame:
For, till she leaves thy court, it is decreed,
Thy bowl to empty and thy flock to bleed.”

While yet he speaks, Telemachus replies:
“Ev’n nature starts, and what ye ask denies.
Thus, shall I thus repay a mother’s cares,
Who gave me life, and nursed my infant years!
While sad on foreign shores Ulysses treads.
Or glides a ghost with unapparent shades;
How to Icarius in the bridal hour
Shall I, by waste undone, refund the dower?
How from my father should I vengeance dread!
How would my mother curse my hated head!
And while in wrath to vengeful fiends she cries,
How from their hell would vengeful fiends arise!
Abhorr’d by all, accursed my name would grow,
The earth’s disgrace, and human-kind my foe.
If this displease, why urge ye here your stay?
Haste from the court, ye spoilers, haste away:
Waste in wild riot what your land allows,
There ply the early feast, and late carouse.
But if to honour lost, ’tis still decreed
For you my bowl shall flow, my flocks shall bleed;
Judge, and assert my right, impartial Jove!
By him, and all the immortal host above
(A sacred oath), if heaven the power supply,
Vengeance I vow, and for your wrongs ye die.”

With that, two eagles from a mountain’s height
By Jove’s command direct their rapid flight;
Swift they descend, with wing to wing conjoin’d,
Stretch their broad plumes, and float upon the wind.
Above the assembled peers they wheel on high,
And clang their wings, and hovering beat the sky;
With ardent eyes the rival train they threat,
And shrieking loud denounce approaching fate.
They cuff, they tear; their cheeks and neck they rend,
And from their plumes huge drops of blood descend;
Then sailing o’er the domes and towers, they fly,
Full toward the east, and mount into the sky.

The wondering rivals gaze, with cares oppress’d,
And chilling horrors freeze in every breast,
Till big with knowledge of approaching woes,
The prince of augurs, Halitherses, rose:
Prescient he view’d the aërial tracks, and drew
A sure presage from every wing that flew.

“Ye sons (he cried) of Ithaca, give ear;
Hear all! but chiefly you, O rivals! hear.
Destruction sure o’er all your heads impends
Ulysses comes, and death his steps attends.
Nor to the great alone is death decreed;
We and our guilty Ithaca must bleed.
Why cease we then the wrath of heaven to stay?
Be humbled all, and lead, ye great! the way.
For lo my words no fancied woes relate;
I speak from science and the voice of fate.

“When great Ulysses sought the Phrygian shores
To shake with war proud Ilion’s lofty towers,
Deeds then undone my faithful tongue foretold:
Heaven seal’d my words, and you those deeds behold.
I see (I cried) his woes, a countless train;
I see his friends o’erwhelm’d beneath the main;
How twice ten years from shore to shore he roams:
Now twice ten years are past, and now he comes!”

To whom Eurymachus—“Fly, dotard fly,
With thy wise dreams, and fables of the sky.
Go prophesy at home, thy sons advise:
Here thou art sage in vain—I better read the skies
Unnumber’d birds glide through the aërial way;
Vagrants of air, and unforeboding stray.
Cold in the tomb, or in the deeps below,
Ulysses lies; oh wert thou laid as low!
Then would that busy head no broils suggest,
For fire to rage Telemachus’ breast,
From him some bribe thy venal tongue requires,
And interest, not the god, thy voice inspires.
His guideless youth, if thy experienced age
Mislead fallacious into idle rage,
Vengeance deserved thy malice shall repress.
And but augment the wrongs thou would’st redress,
Telemachus may bid the queen repair
To great Icarius, whose paternal care
Will guide her passion, and reward her choice
With wealthy dower, and bridal gifts of price.
Till she retires, determined we remain,
And both the prince and augur threat in vain:
His pride of words, and thy wild dream of fate,
Move not the brave, or only move their hate,
Threat on, O prince! elude the bridal day.
Threat on, till all thy stores in waste decay.
True, Greece affords a train of lovely dames,
In wealth and beauty worthy of our flames:
But never from this nobler suit we cease;
For wealth and beauty less than virtue please.”

To whom the youth: “Since then in vain I tell
My numerous woes, in silence let them dwell.
But Heaven, and all the Greeks, have heard my wrongs;
To Heaven, and all the Greeks, redress belongs;
Yet this I ask (nor be it ask’d in vain),
A bark to waft me o’er the rolling main,
The realms of Pyle and Sparta to explore,
And seek my royal sire from shore to shore;
If, or to fame his doubtful fate be known,
Or to be learn’d from oracles alone,
If yet he lives, with patience I forbear,
Till the fleet hours restore the circling year;
But if already wandering in the train
Of empty shades, I measure back the main,
Plant the fair column o’er the mighty dead,
And yield his consort to the nuptial bed.”

He ceased; and while abash’d the peers attend,
Mentor arose, Ulysses’ faithful friend:
(When fierce in arms he sought the scenes of war,
“My friend (he cried), my palace be thy care;
Years roll’d on years my godlike sire decay,
Guard thou his age, and his behests obey.”)
Stern as he rose, he cast his eyes around,
That flash’d with rage; and as spoke, he frown’d,

“O never, never more let king be just,
Be mild in power, or faithful to his trust!
Let tyrants govern with an iron rod,
Oppress, destroy, and be the scourge of God;
Since he who like a father held his reign,
So soon forgot, was just and mild in vain!
True, while my friend is grieved, his griefs I share;
Yet now the rivals are my smallest care:
They for the mighty mischiefs they devise,
Ere long shall pay—their forfeit lives the price.
But against you, ye Greeks! ye coward train!
Gods! how my soul is moved with just disdain!
Dumb ye all stand, and not one tongue affords
His injured prince the little aid of words.”

While yet he spoke, Leocritus rejoined:
“O pride of words, and arrogance of mind!
Would’st thou to rise in arms the Greeks advise?
Join all your powers? in arms, ye Greeks, arise!
Yet would your powers in vain our strength oppose.
The valiant few o’ermatch a host of foes.
Should great Ulysses stern appear in arms,
While the bowl circles and the banquet warms;
Though to his breast his spouse with transport flies,
Torn from her breast, that hour, Ulysses dies.
But hence retreating to your domes repair.
To arm the vessel, Mentor! be thy care,
And Halitherses! thine: be each his friend;
Ye loved the father: go, the son attend.
But yet, I trust, the boaster means to stay
Safe in the court, nor tempt the watery way.”

Then, with a rushing sound the assembly bend
Diverse their steps: the rival rout ascend
The royal dome; while sad the prince explores
The neighbouring main, and sorrowing treads the shores.
There, as the waters o’er his hands he shed,
The royal suppliant to Minerva pray’d:

“O goddess! who descending from the skies
Vouchsafed thy presence to my wondering eyes,
By whose commands the raging deeps I trace,
And seek my sire through storms and rolling seas!
Hear from thy heavens above, O warrior maid!
Descend once more, propitious to my aid.
Without thy presence, vain is thy command:
Greece, and the rival train, thy voice withstand.”

Indulgent to his prayer, the goddess took
Sage Mentor’s form, and thus like Mentor spoke:

“O prince, in early youth divinely wise,
Born, the Ulysses of thy age to rise
If to the son the father’s worth descends,
O’er the wide wave success thy ways attends
To tread the walks of death he stood prepared;
And what he greatly thought, he nobly dared.
Were not wise sons descendant of the wise,
And did not heroes from brave heroes rise,
Vain were my hopes: few sons attain the praise
Of their great sires, and most their sires disgrace.
But since thy veins paternal virtue fires,
And all Penelope thy soul inspires,
Go, and succeed: the rivals’ aims despise;
For never, never wicked man was wise.
Blind they rejoice, though now, ev’n now they fall;
Death hastes amain: one hour o’erwhelms them all!
And lo, with speed we plough the watery way;
My power shall guard thee, and my hand convey:
The winged vessel studious I prepare,
Through seas and realms companion of thy care.
Thou to the court ascend: and to the shores
(When night advances) bear the naval stores;
Bread, that decaying man with strength supplies,
And generous wine, which thoughtful sorrow flies.
Meanwhile the mariners, by my command,
Shall speed aboard, a valiant chosen band.
Wide o’er the bay, by vessel vessel rides;
The best I choose to waft then o’er the tides.”

She spoke: to his high dome the prince returns,
And, as he moves, with royal anguish mourns.
’Twas riot all, among the lawless train;
Boar bled by boar, and goat by goat lay slain.
Arrived, his hand the gay Antinous press’d,
And thus deriding, with a smile address’d:

“Grieve not, O daring prince! that noble heart;
Ill suits gay youth the stern heroic part.
Indulge the genial hour, unbend thy soul,
Leave thought to age, and drain the flowing bowl.
Studious to ease thy grief, our care provides
The bark, to waft thee o’er the swelling tides.”

“Is this (returns the prince) for mirth a time?
When lawless gluttons riot, mirth’s a crime;
The luscious wines, dishonour’d, lose their taste;
The song is noise, and impious is the feast.
Suffice it to have spent with swift decay
The wealth of kings, and made my youth a prey.
But now the wise instructions of the sage,
And manly thoughts inspired by manly age,
Teach me to seek redress for all my woe,
Here, or in Pyle—in Pyle, or here, your foe.
Deny your vessels, ye deny in vain:
A private voyager I pass the main.
Free breathe the winds, and free the billows flow;
And where on earth I live, I live your foe.”

He spoke and frown’d, nor longer deign’d to stay,
Sternly his hand withdrew, and strode away.

Meantime, o’er all the dome, they quaff, they feast,
Derisive taunts were spread from guest to guest,
And each in jovial mood his mate address’d:

“Tremble ye not, O friends, and coward fly,
Doom’d by the stern Telemachus to die?
To Pyle or Sparta to demand supplies,
Big with revenge, the mighty warrior flies;
Or comes from Ephyre with poisons fraught,
And kills us all in one tremendous draught!”

“Or who can say (his gamesome mate replies)
But, while the danger of the deeps he tries
He, like his sire, may sink deprived of breath,
And punish us unkindly by his death?
What mighty labours would he then create,
To seize his treasures, and divide his state,
The royal palace to the queen convey,
Or him she blesses in the bridal day!”

Meantime the lofty rooms the prince surveys,
Where lay the treasures of the Ithacian race:
Here ruddy brass and gold refulgent blazed;
There polished chests embroider’d vestures graced;
Here jars of oil breathed forth a rich perfume;
There casks of wine in rows adorn’d the dome
(Pure flavorous wine, by gods in bounty given
And worthy to exalt the feasts of heaven).
Untouch’d they stood, till, his long labours o’er,
The great Ulysses reach’d his native shore.
A double strength of bars secured the gates;
Fast by the door the wise Euryclea waits;
Euryclea, who great Ops! thy lineage shared,
And watch’d all night, all day, a faithful guard.

To whom the prince: “O thou whose guardian care
Nursed the most wretched king that breathes the air;
Untouch’d and sacred may these vessels stand,
Till great Ulysses views his native land.
But by thy care twelve urns of wine be fill’d;
Next these in worth, and firm these urns be seal’d;
And twice ten measures of the choicest flour
Prepared, ere yet descends the evening hour.
For when the favouring shades of night arise,
And peaceful slumbers close my mother’s eyes,
Me from our coast shall spreading sails convey,
To seek Ulysses through the watery way.”

While yet he spoke, she fill’d the walls with cries,
And tears ran trickling from her aged eyes.
“O whither, whither flies my son (she cried)
To realms; that rocks and roaring seas divide?
In foreign lands thy father’s days decay’d.
And foreign lands contain the mighty dead.
The watery way ill-fated if thou try,
All, all must perish, and by fraud you die!
Then stay, my, child! storms beat, and rolls the main,
Oh, beat those storms, and roll the seas in vain!”

“Far hence (replied the prince) thy fears be driven:
Heaven calls me forth; these counsels are of Heaven.
But, by the powers that hate the perjured, swear,
To keep my voyage from the royal ear,
Nor uncompell’d the dangerous truth betray,
Till twice six times descends the lamp of day,
Lest the sad tale a mother’s life impair,
And grief destroy what time awhile would spare.”

Thus he. The matron with uplifted eyes
Attests the all-seeing sovereign of the skies.
Then studious she prepares the choicest flour,
The strength of wheat and wines an ample store.
While to the rival train the prince returns,
The martial goddess with impatience burns;
Like thee, Telemachus, in voice and size,
With speed divine from street to street she flies,
She bids the mariners prepared to stand,
When night descends, embodied on the strand.
Then to Noëmon swift she runs, she flies,
And asks a bark: the chief a bark supplies.

And now, declining with his sloping wheels,
Down sunk the sun behind the western hills
The goddess shoved the vessel from the shores,
And stow’d within its womb the naval stores,
Full in the openings of the spacious main
It rides; and now descends the sailor-train,

Next, to the court, impatient of delay.
With rapid step the goddess urged her way;
There every eye with slumberous chains she bound,
And dash’d the flowing goblet to the ground.
Drowsy they rose, with heavy fumes oppress’d,
Reel’d from the palace, and retired to rest.
Then thus, in Mentor’s reverend form array’d,
Spoke to Telemachus the martial maid.
“Lo! on the seas, prepared the vessel stands,
The impatient mariner thy speed demands.”
Swift as she spoke, with rapid pace she leads;
The footsteps of the deity he treads.
Swift to the shore they move along the strand;
The ready vessel rides, the sailors ready stand.

He bids them bring their stores; the attending train
Load the tall bark, and launch into the main,
The prince and goddess to the stern ascend;
To the strong stroke at once the rowers bend.
Full from the west she bids fresh breezes blow;
The sable billows foam and roar below.
The chief his orders gives; the obedient band
With due observance wait the chief’s command;
With speed the mast they rear, with speed unbind
The spacious sheet, and stretch it to the wind.
High o’er the roaring waves the spreading sails
Bow the tall mast, and swell before the gales;
The crooked keel the parting surge divides,
And to the stern retreating roll the tides.
And now they ship their oars, and crown with wine
The holy goblet to the powers divine:
Imploring all the gods that reign above,
But chief the blue-eyed progeny of Jove.

Thus all the night they stem the liquid way,
And end their voyage with the morning ray.







The sacred sun, above the waters raised,
Through heaven’s eternal brazen portals blazed;
And wide o’er earth diffused his cheering ray,
To gods and men to give the golden day.
Now on the coast of Pyle the vessel falls,
Before old Neleus’ venerable walls.
There suppliant to the monarch of the flood,
At nine green theatres the Pylians stood,
Each held five hundred (a deputed train),
At each, nine oxen on the sand lay slain.
They taste the entrails, and the altars load
With smoking thighs, an offering to the god.
Full for the port the Ithacensians stand,
And furl their sails, and issue on the land.
Telemachus already press’d the shore;
Not first, the power of wisdom march’d before,
And ere the sacrificing throng he join’d,
Admonish’d thus his well-attending mind:

“Proceed, my son! this youthful shame expel;
An honest business never blush to tell.
To learn what fates thy wretched sire detain,
We pass’d the wide immeasurable main.
Meet then the senior far renown’d for sense
With reverend awe, but decent confidence:
Urge him with truth to frame his fair replies;
And sure he will; for wisdom never lies.”

“Oh tell me, Mentor! tell me, faithful guide
(The youth with prudent modesty replied),
How shall I meet, or how accost the sage,
Unskill’d in speech, nor yet mature of age?
Awful th’approach, and hard the task appears,
To question wisely men of riper years.”

To whom the martial goddess thus rejoin’d:
“Search, for some thoughts, thy own suggesting mind;
And others, dictated by heavenly power,
Shall rise spontaneous in the needful hour.
For nought unprosperous shall thy ways attend,
Born with good omens, and with heaven thy friend.”

She spoke, and led the way with swiftest speed;
As swift, the youth pursued the way she led;
and join’d the band before the sacred fire,
Where sate, encompass’d with his sons, the sire.
The youth of Pylos, some on pointed wood
Transfix’d the fragments, some prepared the food:
In friendly throngs they gather to embrace
Their unknown guests, and at the banquet place,
Pisistratus was first to grasp their hands,
And spread soft hides upon the yellow sands;
Along the shore the illustrious pair he led,
Where Nestor sate with youthful Thrasymed,
To each a portion of the feast he bore,
And held the golden goblet foaming o’er;
Then first approaching to the elder guest,
The latent goddess in these words address’d:
“Whoe’er thou art, whom fortune brings to keep
These rites of Neptune, monarch of the deep,
Thee first it fits, O stranger! to prepare
The due libation and the solemn prayer;
Then give thy friend to shed the sacred wine;
Though much thy younger, and his years like mine,
He too, I deem, implores the power divine;
For all mankind alike require their grace,
All born to want; a miserable race!”
He spake, and to her hand preferr’d the bowl;
A secret pleasure touch’d Athena’s soul,
To see the preference due to sacred age
Regarded ever by the just and sage.
Of Ocean’s king she then implores the grace.
“O thou! whose arms this ample globe embrace,
Fulfil our wish, and let thy glory shine
On Nestor first, and Nestor’s royal line;
Next grant the Pylian states their just desires,
Pleased with their hecatomb’s ascending fires;
Last, deign Telemachus and me to bless,
And crown our voyage with desired success.”

Thus she: and having paid the rite divine,
Gave to Ulysses’ son the rosy wine.
Suppliant he pray’d. And now the victims dress’d
They draw, divide, and celebrate the feast.
The banquet done, the narrative old man,
Thus mild, the pleasing conference began:

“Now gentle guests! the genial banquet o’er,
It fits to ask ye, what your native shore,
And whence your race? on what adventure say,
Thus far you wander through the watery way?
Relate if business, or the thirst of gain,
Engage your journey o’er the pathless main
Where savage pirates seek through seas unknown
The lives of others, venturous of their own.”

Urged by the precepts by the goddess given,
And fill’d with confidence infused from Heaven,
The youth, whom Pallas destined to be wise
And famed among the sons of men, replies:
“Inquir’st thou, father! from what coast we came?
(Oh grace and glory of the Grecian name!)
From where high Ithaca o’erlooks the floods,
Brown with o’er-arching shades and pendent woods
Us to these shores our filial duty draws,
A private sorrow, not a public cause.
My sire I seek, where’er the voice of fame
Has told the glories of his noble name,
The great Ulysses; famed from shore to shore
For valour much, for hardy suffering more.
Long time with thee before proud Ilion’s wall
In arms he fought; with thee beheld her fall.
Of all the chiefs, this hero’s fate alone
Has Jove reserved, unheard of, and unknown;
Whether in fields by hostile fury slain,
Or sunk by tempests in the gulfy main?
Of this to learn, oppress’d with tender fears,
Lo, at thy knee his suppliant son appears.
If or thy certain eye, or curious ear,
Have learnt his fate, the whole dark story clear
And, oh! whate’er Heaven destined to betide,
Let neither flattery soothe, nor pity hide.
Prepared I stand: he was but born to try
The lot of man; to suffer, and to die.
Oh then, if ever through the ten years’ war
The wise, the good Ulysses claim’d thy care;
If e’er he join’d thy council, or thy sword,
True in his deed, and constant to his word;
Far as thy mind through backward time can see
Search all thy stores of faithful memory:
’Tis sacred truth I ask, and ask of thee.”

To him experienced Nestor thus rejoin’d:
“O friend! what sorrows dost thou bring to mind!
Shall I the long, laborious scene review,
And open all the wounds of Greece anew?
What toils by sea! where dark in quest of prey
Dauntless we roved; Achilles led the way;
What toils by land! where mix’d in fatal fight
Such numbers fell, such heroes sunk to night;
There Ajax great, Achilles there the brave,
There wise Patroclus, fill an early grave:
There, too, my son—ah, once my best delight
Once swift of foot, and terrible in fight;
In whom stern courage with soft virtue join’d
A faultless body and a blameless mind;
Antilochus—What more can I relate?
How trace the tedious series of our fate?
Not added years on years my task could close,
The long historian of my country’s woes;
Back to thy native islands might’st thou sail,
And leave half-heard the melancholy tale.
Nine painful years on that detested shore;
What stratagems we form’d, what toils we bore!
Still labouring on, till scarce at last we found
Great Jove propitious, and our conquest crown’d.
Far o’er the rest thy mighty father shined,
In wit, in prudence, and in force of mind.
Art thou the son of that illustrious sire?
With joy I grasp thee, and with love admire.
So like your voices, and your words so wise,
Who finds thee younger must consult his eyes.
Thy sire and I were one; nor varied aught
In public sentence, or in private thought;
Alike to council or the assembly came,
With equal souls, and sentiments the same.
But when (by wisdom won) proud Ilion burn’d,
And in their ships the conquering Greeks return’d,
’Twas God’s high will the victors to divide,
And turn the event, confounding human pride;
Some he destroy’d, some scatter’d as the dust
(Not all were prudent, and not all were just).
Then Discord, sent by Pallas from above,
Stern daughter of the great avenger Jove,
The brother-kings inspired with fell debate;
Who call’d to council all the Achaian state,
But call’d untimely (not the sacred rite
Observed, nor heedful of the setting light,
Nor herald sword the session to proclaim),
Sour with debauch, a reeling tribe they came.
To these the cause of meeting they explain,
And Menelaus moves to cross the main;
Not so the king of men: he will’d to stay,
The sacred rites and hecatombs to pay,
And calm Minerva’s wrath. Oh blind to fate!
The gods not lightly change their love, or hate.
With ireful taunts each other they oppose,
Till in loud tumult all the Greeks arose.
Now different counsels every breast divide,
Each burns with rancour to the adverse side;
The unquiet night strange projects entertain’d
(So Jove, that urged us to our fate, ordain’d).
We with the rising morn our ships unmoor’d,
And brought our captives and our stores aboard;
But half the people with respect obey’d
The king of men, and at his bidding stay’d.
Now on the wings of winds our course we keep
(For God had smooth’d the waters of the deep);
For Tenedos we spread our eager oars,
There land, and pay due victims to the powers;
To bless our safe return, we join in prayer;
But angry Jove dispersed our vows in air,
And raised new discord. Then (so Heaven decreed)
Ulysses first and Nestor disagreed!
Wise as he was, by various counsels sway’d,
He there, though late, to please the monarch, stay’d.
But I, determined, stem the foamy floods,
Warn’d of the coming fury of the gods.
With us, Tydides fear’d, and urged his haste:
And Menelaus came, but came the last,
He join’d our vessels in the Lesbian bay,
While yet we doubted of our watery way;
If to the right to urge the pilot’s toil
(The safer road), beside the Psyrian isle;
Or the straight course to rocky Chios plough,
And anchor under Mimas’ shaggy brow?
We sought direction of the power divine:
The god propitious gave the guiding sign;
Through the mid seas he bid our navy steer,
And in Euboea shun the woes we fear.
The whistling winds already waked the sky;
Before the whistling winds the vessels fly,
With rapid swiftness cut the liquid way,
And reach Gerestus at the point of day.
There hecatombs of bulls, to Neptune slain,
High-flaming please the monarch of the main.
The fourth day shone, when all their labours o’er,
Tydides’ vessels touched the wish’d-for shore.
But I to Pylos scud before the gales,
The god still breathing on my swelling sails;
Separate from all, I safely landed here;
Their fates or fortunes never reach’d my ear.
Yet what I learn’d, attend; as here I sat,
And ask’d each voyager each hero’s fate;
Curious to know, and willing to relate.

“Safe reach’d the Myrmidons their native land,
Beneath Achilles’ warlike son’s command.
Those, whom the heir of great Apollo’s art,
Brave Philoctetes, taught to wing the dart;
And those whom Idomen from Ilion’s plain
Had led, securely cross’d the dreadful main
How Agamemnon touch’d his Argive coast,
And how his life by fraud and force he lost,
And how the murderer, paid his forfeit breath;
What lands so distant from that scene of death
But trembling heard the fame? and heard, admire.
How well the son appeased his slaughter’d sire!
Ev’n to the unhappy, that unjustly bleed,
Heaven gives posterity, to avenge the deed.
So fell Ægysthus; and mayest thou, my friend,
(On whom the virtues of thy sire descend,)
Make future times thy equal act adore,
And be what brave Orestes was before!”

The prudent youth replied: “O thou the grace
And lasting glory of the Grecian race!
Just was the vengeance, and to latest days
Shall long posterity resound the praise.
Some god this arm with equal prowess bless!
And the proud suitors shall its force confess;
Injurious men! who while my soul is sore
Of fresh affronts, are meditating more.
But Heaven denies this honour to my hand,
Nor shall my father repossess the land;
The father’s fortune never to return,
And the sad son’s to softer and to mourn!”
Thus he; and Nestor took the word: “My son,
Is it then true, as distant rumours run,
That crowds of rivals for thy mother’s charms
Thy palace fill with insults and alarms?
Say, is the fault, through tame submission, thine?
Or leagued against thee, do thy people join,
Moved by some oracle, or voice divine?
And yet who knows, but ripening lies in fate
An hour of vengeance for the afflicted state;
When great Ulysses shall suppress these harms,
Ulysses singly, or all Greece in arms.
But if Athena, war’s triumphant maid,
The happy son will as the father aid,
(Whose fame and safety was her constant care
In every danger and in every war:
Never on man did heavenly favour shine
With rays so strong, distinguish’d and divine,
As those with which Minerva mark’d thy sire)
So might she love thee, so thy soul inspire!
Soon should their hopes in humble dust be laid,
And long oblivion of the bridal bed.”

“Ah! no such hope (the prince with sighs replies)
Can touch my breast; that blessing Heaven denies.
Ev’n by celestial favour were it given,
Fortune or fate would cross the will of Heaven.”

“What words are these, and what imprudence thine?
(Thus interposed the martial maid divine)
Forgetful youth! but know, the Power above
With ease can save each object of his love;
Wide as his will, extends his boundless grace;
Nor lost in time nor circumscribed by place.
Happier his lot, who, many sorrows pass’d,
Long labouring gains his natal shore at last;
Than who, too speedy, hastes to end his life
By some stern ruffian, or adulterous wife.
Death only is the lot which none can miss,
And all is possible to Heaven but this.
The best, the dearest favourite of the sky,
Must taste that cup, for man is born to die.”

Thus check’d, replied Ulysses’ prudent heir:
“Mentor, no more—the mournful thought forbear;
For he no more must draw his country’s breath,
Already snatch’d by fate, and the black doom of death!
Pass we to other subjects; and engage
On themes remote the venerable sage
(Who thrice has seen the perishable kind
Of men decay, and through three ages shined
Like gods majestic, and like gods in mind);
For much he knows, and just conclusions draws,
From various precedents, and various laws.
O son of Neleus! awful Nestor, tell
How he, the mighty Agamemnon, fell;
By what strange fraud Ægysthus wrought, relate
(By force he could not) such a hero’s fate?
Live Menelaus not in Greece? or where
Was then the martial brother’s pious care?
Condemn’d perhaps some foreign shore to tread;
Or sure Ægysthus had not dared the deed.”

To whom the full of days: Illustrious youth,
Attend (though partly thou hast guess’d) the truth.
For had the martial Menelaus found
The ruffian breathing yet on Argive ground;
Nor earth had bid his carcase from the skies,
Nor Grecian virgins shriek’d his obsequies,
But fowls obscene dismember’d his remains,
And dogs had torn him on the naked plains.
While us the works of bloody Mars employ’d,
The wanton youth inglorious peace enjoy’d:
He stretch’d at ease in Argos’ calm recess
(Whose stately steeds luxuriant pastures bless),
With flattery’s insinuating art
Soothed the frail queen, and poison’d all her heart.
At first, with worthy shame and decent pride,
The royal dame his lawless suit denied.
For virtue’s image yet possess’d her mind.
Taught by a master of the tuneful kind;
Atrides, parting for the Trojan war,
Consign’d the youthful consort to his care.
True to his charge, the bard preserved her long
In honour’s limits; such the power of song.
But when the gods these objects of their hate
Dragg’d to destruction by the links of fate;
The bard they banish’d from his native soil,
And left all helpless in a desert isle;
There he, the sweetest of the sacred train,
Sung dying to the rocks, but sung in vain.
Then virtue was no more; her guard away,
She fell, to lust a voluntary prey.
Even to the temple stalk’d the adulterous spouse,
With impious thanks, and mockery of the vows,
With images, with garments, and with gold;
And odorous fumes from loaded altars roll’d.

“Meantime from flaming Troy we cut the way
With Menelaus, through the curling sea.
But when to Sunium’s sacred point we came,
Crown’d with the temple of the Athenian dame;
Atride’s pilot, Phrontes, there expired
(Phrontes, of all the songs of men admired
To steer the bounding bark with steady toil,
When the storm thickens, and the billows boil);
While yet he exercised the steerman’s art,
Apollo touch’d him with his gentle dart;
Even with the rudder in his hand, he fell.
To pay whole honours to the shades of hell,
We check’d our haste, by pious office bound,
And laid our old companion in the ground.
And now the rites discharged, our course we keep
Far on the gloomy bosom of the deep:
Soon as Malae’s misty tops arise,
Sudden the Thunderer blackens all the skies,
And the winds whistle, and the surges roll
Mountains on mountains, and obscure the pole.
The tempest scatters, and divides our fleet;
Part, the storm urges on the coast of Crete,
Where winding round the rich Cydonian plain,
The streams of Jardan issue to the main.
There stands a rock, high, eminent and steep,
Whose shaggy brow o’erhangs the shady deep,
And views Gortyna on the western side;
On this rough Auster drove the impetuous tide:
With broken force the billows roll’d away,
And heaved the fleet into the neighb’ring bay.
Thus saved from death, they gain’d the Phæstan shores,
With shatter’d vessels and disabled oars;
But five tall barks the winds and water toss’d,
Far from their fellows, on the Ægyptian coast.
There wander’d Menelaus through foreign shores
Amassing gold, and gathering naval stores;
While cursed Ægysthus the detested deed
By fraud fulfilled, and his great brother bled.
Seven years, the traitor rich Mycenae sway’d,
And his stern rule the groaning land obey’d;
The eighth, from Athens to his realm restored,
Orestes brandish’d the avenging sword,
Slew the dire pair, and gave to funeral flame
The vile assassin and adulterous dame.
That day, ere yet the bloody triumphs cease,
Return’d Atrides to the coast of Greece,
And safe to Argos port his navy brought,
With gifts of price and ponderous treasure fraught.
Hence warn’d, my son, beware! nor idly stand
Too long a stranger to thy native land;
Lest heedless absence wear thy wealth away,
While lawless feasters in thy palace away;
Perhaps may seize thy realm, and share the spoil;
And though return, with disappointed toil,
From thy vain journey, to a rifled isle.
However, my friend, indulge one labour more,
And seek Atrides on the Spartan shore.
He, wandering long a wider circle made,
And many-languaged nations has survey’d:
And measured tracks unknown to other ships,
Amid the monstrous wonders of the deeps,
(A length of ocean and unbounded sky.
Which scarce the sea-fowl in a year o’erfly);
Go then; to Sparta take the watery way,
Thy ship and sailors but for orders stay;
Or, if my land then choose thy course to bend,
My steeds, my chariots, and my songs, attend;
Thee to Atrides they shall safe convey,
Guides of thy road, companions of thy way.
Urge him with truth to frame his wise replies,
And sure he will; for Menelaus is wise.”
Thus while he speaks the ruddy sun descends,
And twilight grey her evening shade extends.
Then thus the blue-eyed maid: “O full of days!
Wise are thy words, and just are all thy ways.
Now immolate the tongues, and mix the wine,
Sacred to Neptune and the powers divine,
The lamp of day is quench’d beneath the deep,
And soft approach the balmy hours of sleep;
Nor fits it to prolong the heavenly feast,
Timeless, indecent, but retire to rest.”

So spake Jove’s daughter, the celestial maid,
The sober train attended and obey’d.
The sacred heralds on their hands around
Pour’d the full urns; the youths the goblets crown’d;
From bowl to bowl the homely beverage flows;
While to the final sacrifice they rose.
The tongues they cast upon the fragrant flame,
And pour, above, the consecrated stream.
And now, their thirst by copious draughts allay’d,
The youthful hero and the Athenian maid
Propose departure from the finish’d rite,
And in their hollow bark to pass the night;
But this hospitable sage denied,
“Forbid it, Jove! and all the gods! (he cried),
Thus from my walls and the much-loved son to send
Of such a hero, and of such a friend!
Me, as some needy peasant, would ye leave,
Whom Heaven denies the blessing to relieve?
Me would ye leave, who boast imperial sway,
When beds of royal state invite your stay?
No—long as life this mortal shall inspire,
Or as my children imitate their sire.
Here shall the wandering stranger find his home,
And hospitable rites adorn the dome.”

“Well hast thou spoke (the blue-eyed maid replies),
Beloved old man! benevolent as wise.
Be the kind dictates of thy heart obey’d,
And let thy words Telemachus persuade:
He to thy palace shall thy steps pursue;
I to the ship, to give the orders due,
Prescribe directions and confirm the crew.
For I alone sustain their naval cares,
Who boast experience from these silver hairs;
All youths the rest, whom to this journey move
Like years, like tempers, and their prince’s love
There in the vessel shall I pass the night;
And, soon as morning paints the fields of light,
I go to challenge from the Caucons bold
A debt, contracted in the days of old,
But this, thy guest, received with friendly care
Let thy strong coursers swift to Sparta bear;
Prepare thy chariot at the dawn of day,
And be thy son companion of his way.”

Then, turning with the word, Minerva flies,
And soars an eagle through the liquid skies.
Vision divine! the throng’d spectators gaze
In holy wonder fix’d, and still amaze.
But chief the reverend sage admired; he took
The hand of young Telemachus, and spoke:
“Oh, happy youth! and favoured of the skies,
Distinguished care of guardian deities!
Whose early years for future worth engage,
No vulgar manhood, no ignoble age.
For lo! none other of the course above,
Then she, the daughter of almighty Jove,
Pallas herself, the war-triumphant maid;
Confess’d is thine, as once thy father’s aid.
So guide me, goddess! so propitious shine
On me, my consort, and my royal line!
A yearling bullock to thy name shall smoke,
Untamed, unconscious of the galling yoke,
With ample forehead, and yet tender horns,
Whose budding honours ductile gold adorns.”

Submissive thus the hoary sire preferr’d
His holy vow: the favouring goddess heard.
Then, slowly rising, o’er the sandy space
Precedes the father, follow’d by his race,
(A long procession) timely marching home
In comely order to the regal dome.
There when arrived, on thrones around him placed,
His sons and grandsons the wide circle graced.
To these the hospitable sage, in sign
Of social welcome, mix’d the racy wine
(Late from the mellowing cask restored to light,
By ten long years refined, and rosy bright).
To Pallas high the foaming bowl he crown’d,
And sprinkled large libations on the ground.
Each drinks a full oblivion of his cares,
And to the gifts of balmy sleep repairs.
Deep in a rich alcove the prince was laid,
And slept beneath the pompous colonnade;
Fast by his side Pisistratus was spread
(In age his equal) on a splendid bed:
But in an inner court, securely closed,
The reverend Nestor and his queen reposed.

When now Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
With rosy lustre purpled o’er the lawn,
The old man early rose, walk’d forth, and sate
On polish’d stone before his palace gate;
With unguents smooth the lucid marble shone,
Where ancient Neleus sate, a rustic throne;
But he descending to the infernal shade,
Sage Nestor fill’d it, and the sceptre sway’d.
His sons around him mild obeisance pay,
And duteous take the orders of the day.
First Echephron and Stratius quit their bed;
Then Perseus, Aretus, and Thrasymed;
The last Pisistratus arose from rest:
They came, and near him placed the stranger-guest.
To these the senior thus declared his will:
“My sons! the dictates of your sire fulfil.
To Pallas, first of gods, prepare the feast,
Who graced our rites, a more than mortal guest
Let one, despatchful, bid some swain to lead
A well-fed bullock from the grassy mead;
One seek the harbour where the vessels moor,
And bring thy friends, Telemachus! ashore
(Leave only two the galley to attend);
Another Laerceus must we send,
Artist devine, whose skilful hands infold
The victim’s horn with circumfusile gold.
The rest may here the pious duty share,
And bid the handmaids for the feast prepare,
The seats to range, the fragrant wood to bring,
And limpid waters from the living spring.”

He said, and busy each his care bestow’d;
Already at the gates the bullock low’d,
Already came the Ithacensian crew,
The dexterous smith the tools already drew;
His ponderous hammer and his anvil sound,
And the strong tongs to turn the metal round.
Nor was Minerva absent from the rite,
She view’d her honours, and enjoyed the sight,
With reverend hand the king presents the gold,
Which round the intorted horns the gilder roll’d.
So wrought as Pallas might with pride behold.
Young Aretus from forth his bridal bower
Brought the full laver, o’er their hands to pour,
And canisters of consecrated flour.
Stratius and Echephron the victim led;
The axe was held by warlike Thrasymed,
In act to strike; before him Perseus stood,
The vase extending to receive the blood.
The king himself initiates to the power:
Scatters with quivering hand the sacred flour,
And the stream sprinkles; from the curling brows
The hair collected in the fire he throws.
Soon as due vows on every part were paid,
And sacred wheat upon the victim laid,
Strong Thrasymed discharged the speeding blow
Full on his neck, and cut the nerves in two.
Down sunk the heavy beast; the females round
Maids, wives, and matrons, mix a shrilling sound.
Nor scorned the queen the holy choir to join
(The first born she, of old Clymenus’ line:
In youth by Nestor loved, of spotless fame.
And loved in age, Eurydice her name).
From earth they rear him, struggling now with death;
And Nestor’s youngest stops the vents of breath.
The soul for ever flies; on all sides round
Streams the black blood, and smokes upon the ground
The beast they then divide and disunite
The ribs and limbs, observant of the rite:
On these, in double cauls involved with art,
The choicest morsels lay from every part.
The sacred sage before his altar stands,
Turns the burnt offering with his holy hands,
And pours the wine, and bids the flames aspire;
The youth with instruments surround the fire.
The thighs now sacrificed, and entrails dress’d,
The assistants part, transfix, and broil the rest
While these officious tend the rites divine,
The last fair branch of the Nestorean line,
Sweet Polycaste, took the pleasing toil
To bathe the prince, and pour the fragrant oil.
O’er his fair limbs a flowery vest he threw,
And issued, like a god, to mortal view.
His former seat beside the king he found
(His people’s father with his peers around);
All placed at ease the holy banquet join,
And in the dazzling goblet laughs the wine.

The rage of thirst and hunger now suppress’d,
The monarch turns him to his royal guest;
And for the promised journey bids prepare
The smooth hair’d horses, and the rapid car.
Observant of his word, the word scarce spoke,
The sons obey, and join them to the yoke.
Then bread and wine a ready handmaid brings,
And presents, such as suit the state of kings.
The glittering seat Telemachus ascends;
His faithful guide Pisistratus attends;
With hasty hand the ruling reins he drew;
He lash’d the coursers, and the coursers flew.
Beneath the bounding yoke alike they hold
Their equal pace, and smoked along the field.
The towers of Pylos sink, its views decay,
Fields after fields fly back, till close of day;
Then sunk the sun, and darken’d all the way.

To Pherae now, Diocleus’ stately seat
(Of Alpheus’ race), the weary youths retreat.
His house affords the hospitable rite,
And pleased they sleep (the blessing of the night).
But when Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
With rosy lustre purpled o’er the lawn,
Again they mount, their journey to renew,
And from the sounding portico they flew.
Along the waving fields their way they hold
The fields receding as their chariot roll’d;
Then slowly sunk the ruddy globe of light,
And o’er the shaded landscape rush’d the night.







And now proud Sparta with their wheels resounds,
Sparta whose walls a range of hills surrounds;
At the fair dome the rapid labour ends;
Where sate Atrides ’midst his bridal friends,
With double vows invoking Hymen’s power,
To bless his son’s and daughter’s nuptial hour.

That day, to great Achilles’ son resign’d,
Hermione, the fairest of her kind,
Was sent to crown the long-protracted joy,
Espoused before the final doom of Troy;
With steeds and gilded cars, a gorgeous train
Attend the nymphs to Phthia’s distant reign.
Meanwhile at home, to Megapenthe’s bed
The virgin choir Alector’s daughter led.
Brave Megapenthes from a stolen amour
To great Atrides’ age his handmaid bore;
To Helen’s bed the gods alone assign
Hermione, to extend the regal line;
On whom a radiant pomp of Graces wait,
Resembling Venus in attractive state.

While this gay friendly troop the king surround,
With festival and mirth the roofs resound;
A bard amid the joyous circle sings
High airs attemper’d to the vocal strings;
Whilst warbling to the varied strain, advance
Two sprightly youths to form the bounding dance,
’Twas then, that issuing through the palace gate,
The splendid car roll’d slow in regal state:
On the bright eminence young Nestor shone,
And fast beside him great Ulysses’ son;
Grave Eteoneus saw the pomp appear,
And speeding, thus address’d the royal ear;

“Two youths approach, whose semblant features prove
Their blood devolving from the source of Jove
Is due reception deign’d, or must they bend
Their doubtful course to seek a distant friend?”

“Insensate! (with a sigh the king replies,)
Too long, misjudging, have I thought thee wise
But sure relentless folly steels thy breast,
Obdurate to reject the stranger-guest;
To those dear hospitable rites a foe,
Which in my wanderings oft relieved my woe;
Fed by the bounty of another’s board,
Till pitying Jove my native realm restored—
Straight be the coursers from the car released,
Conduct the youths to grace the genial feast.”

The seneschal, rebuked, in haste withdrew;
With equal haste a menial train pursue:
Part led the coursers, from the car enlarged,
Each to a crib with choicest grain surcharged;
Part in a portico, profusely graced
With rich magnificence, the chariot placed;
Then to the dome the friendly pair invite,
Who eye the dazzling roofs with vast delight;
Resplendent as the blaze of summer noon,
Or the pale radiance of the midnight moon.
From room to room their eager view they bend
Thence to the bath, a beauteous pile, descend;
Where a bright damsel train attends the guests
With liquid odours, and embroider’d vests.
Refresh’d, they wait them to the bower of state,
Where, circled with his peers, Atrides sate;
Throned next the king, a fair attendant brings
The purest product of the crystal springs;
High on a massy vase of silver mould,
The burnish’d laver flames with solid gold,
In solid gold the purple vintage flows,
And on the board a second banquet rose.
When thus the king, with hospitable port;
“Accept this welcome to the Spartan court:
The waste of nature let the feast repair,
Then your high lineage and your names declare;
Say from what sceptred ancestry ye claim,
Recorded eminent in deathless fame,
For vulgar parents cannot stamp their race
With signatures of such majestic grace.”

Ceasing, benevolent he straight assigns
The royal portion of the choicest chines
To each accepted friend; with grateful haste
They share the honours of the rich repast.
Sufficed, soft whispering thus to Nestor’s son,
His head reclined, young Ithacus begun:

“View’st thou unmoved, O ever-honour’d most!
These prodigies of art, and wondrous cost!
Above, beneath, around the palace shines
The sunless treasure of exhausted mines;
The spoils of elephants the roofs inlay,
And studded amber darts the golden ray;
Such, and not nobler, in the realms above
My wonder dictates is the dome of Jove.”

The monarch took the word, and grave replied:
“Presumptuous are the vaunts, and vain the pride
Of man, who dares in pomp with Jove contest,
Unchanged, immortal, and supremely blest!
With all my affluence, when my woes are weigh’d,
Envy will own the purchase dearly paid.
For eight slow-circling years, by tempests toss’d,
From Cypress to the far Phoenician coast
(Sidon the capital), I stretch’d my toil
Through regions fatten’d with the flows of Nile.
Next Aethiopia’s utmost bound explore,
And the parch’d borders of the Arabian shore;
Then warp my voyage on the southern gales,
O’er the warm Lybian wave to spread my sails;
That happy clime, where each revolving year
The teeming ewes a triple offspring bear;
And two fair crescents of translucent horn
The brows of all their young increase adorn:
The shepherd swains, with sure abundance blest,
On the fat flock and rural dainties feast;
Nor want of herbage makes the dairy fail,
But every season fills the foaming pail.
Whilst, heaping unwash’d wealth, I distant roam,
The best of brothers, at his natal home,
By the dire fury of a traitress wife,
Ends the sad evening of a stormy life;
Whence, with incessant grief my soul annoy’d,
These riches are possess’d, but not enjoy’d!
My wars, the copious theme of every tongue,
To you your fathers have recorded long.
How favouring Heaven repaid my glorious toils
With a sack’d palace, and barbaric spoils.
Oh! had the gods so large a boon denied
And life, the just equivalent supplied
To those brave warriors, who, with glory fired
Far from their country, in my cause expired!
Still in short intervals of pleasing woe.
Regardful of the friendly dues I owe,
I to the glorious dead, for ever dear!
Indulge the tribute of a grateful tear.
But oh! Ulysses—deeper than the rest
That sad idea wounds my anxious breast!
My heart bleeds fresh with agonizing pain;
The bowl and tasteful viands tempt in vain;
Nor sleep’s soft power can close my streaming eyes,
When imaged to my soul his sorrows rise.
No peril in my cause he ceased to prove,
His labours equall’d only by my love:
And both alike to bitter fortune born,
For him to suffer, and for me to mourn!
Whether he wanders on some friendly coast,
Or glides in Stygian gloom a pensive ghost,
No fame reveals; but, doubtful of his doom,
His good old sire with sorrow to the tomb
Declines his trembling steps; untimely care
Withers the blooming vigour of his heir;
And the chaste partner of his bed and throne
Wastes all her widow’d hours in tender moan.”

While thus pathetic to the prince he spoke,
From the brave youth the streaming passion broke;
Studious to veil the grief, in vain repress’d,
His face he shrouded with his purple vest.
The conscious monarch pierced the coy disguise,
And view’d his filial love with vast surprise:
Dubious to press the tender theme, or wait
To hear the youth inquire his father’s fate.
In this suspense bright Helen graced the room;
Before her breathed a gale of rich perfume.
So moves, adorn’d with each attractive grace,
The silver shafted goddess of the chase!
The seat of majesty Adraste brings,
With art illustrious, for the pomp of kings;
To spread the pall (beneath the regal chair)
Of softest wool, is bright Alcippe’s care.
A silver canister, divinely wrought,
In her soft hands the beauteous Phylo brought;
To Sparta’s queen of old the radiant vase
Alcandra gave, a pledge of royal grace;
For Polybus her lord (whose sovereign sway
The wealthy tribes of Pharian Thebes obey),
When to that court Atrides came, caress’d
With vast munificence the imperial guest:
Two lavers from the richest ore refined,
With silver tripods, the kind host assign’d;
And bounteous from the royal treasure told
Ten equal talents of refulgent gold.
Alcandra, consort of his high command,
A golden distaff gave to Helen’s hand;
And that rich vase, with living sculpture wrought,
Which heap’d with wool the beauteous Phylo brought
The silken fleece, impurpled for the loom,
Rivall’d the hyacinth in vernal bloom.
The sovereign seat then Jove born Helen press’d,
And pleasing thus her sceptred lord address’d:

“Who grace our palace now, that friendly pair,
Speak they their lineage, or their names declare?
Uncertain of the truth, yet uncontroll’d,
Hear me the bodings of my breast unfold.
With wonder wrapp’d on yonder check I trace
The feature of the Ulyssean race:
Diffused o’er each resembling line appear,
In just similitude, the grace and air
Of young Telemachus! the lovely boy,
Who bless’d Ulysses with a father’s joy,
What time the Greeks combined their social arms,
To avenge the stain of my ill-fated charms!”

“Just is thy thought, (the king assenting cries,)
Methinks Ulysses strikes my wondering eyes;
Full shines the father in the filial frame,
His port, his features, and his shape the same;
Such quick regards his sparkling eyes bestow;
Such wavy ringlets o’er his shoulders flow
And when he heard the long disastrous store
Of cares, which in my cause Ulysses bore;
Dismay’d, heart-wounded with paternal woes,
Above restraint the tide of sorrow rose;
Cautious to let the gushing grief appear,
His purple garment veil’d the falling tear.”

“See there confess’d (Pisistratus replies)
The genuine worth of Ithacus the wise!
Of that heroic sire the youth is sprung,
But modest awe hath chain’d his timorous tongue.
Thy voice, O king! with pleased attention heard,
Is like the dictates of a god revered.
With him, at Nestor’s high command, I came,
Whose age I honour with a parent’s name.
By adverse destiny constrained to sue
For counsel and redress, he sues to you
Whatever ill the friendless orphan bears,
Bereaved of parents in his infant years,
Still must the wrong’d Telemachus sustain,
If, hopeful of your aid, he hopes in vain;
Affianced in your friendly power alone,
The youth would vindicate the vacant throne.”

“Is Sparta blest, and these desiring eyes
View my friend’s son? (the king exalting cries;)
Son of my friend, by glorious toils approved,
Whose sword was sacred to the man he loved;
Mirror of constant faith, revered and mourn’d—
When Troy was ruin’d, had the chief return’d,
No Greek an equal space had ere possess’d,
Of dear affection, in my grateful breast.
I, to confirm the mutual joys we shared,
For his abode a capital prepared;
Argos, the seat of sovereign rule, I chose;
Fair in the plan the future palace rose,
Where my Ulysses and his race might reign,
And portion to his tribes the wide domain,
To them my vassals had resign’d a soil,
With teeming plenty to reward their toil.
There with commutual zeal we both had strove
In acts of dear benevolence and love:
Brothers in peace, not rivals in command,
And death alone dissolved the friendly band!
Some envious power the blissful scene destroys;
Vanish’d are all the visionary joys;
The soul of friendship to my hope is lost,
Fated to wander from his natal coast!”

He ceased; a gush of grief began to rise:
Fast streams a tide from beauteous Helen’s eyes;
Fast for the sire the filial sorrows flow;
The weeping monarch swells the mighty woe;
Thy cheeks, Pisistratus, the tears bedew,
While pictured so thy mind appear’d in view,
Thy martial brother; on the Phrygian plain
Extended pale, by swarthy Memnon slain!
But silence soon the son of Nestor broke,
And melting with fraternal pity, spoke:

“Frequent, O king, was Nestor wont to raise
And charm attention with thy copious praise;
To crowd thy various gifts, the sage assign’d
The glory of a firm capacious mind;
With that superior attribute control
This unavailing impotence of soul,
Let not your roof with echoing grief resound,
Now for the feast the friendly bowl is crown’d;
But when, from dewy shade emerging bright,
Aurora streaks the sky with orient light,
Let each deplore his dead; the rites of woe
Are all, alas! the living can bestow;
O’er the congenial dust enjoin’d to shear
The graceful curl, and drop the tender tear.
Then, mingling in the mournful pomp with you,
I’ll pay my brother’s ghost a warrior’s due,
And mourn the brave Antilochus, a name
Not unrecorded in the rolls of fame;
With strength and speed superior form’d, in fight
To face the foe, or intercept his flight;
Too early snatch’d by fate ere known to me!
I boast a witness of his worth in thee.”

“Young and mature! (the monarch thus rejoins,)
In thee renew’d the soul of Nestor shines;
Form’d by the care of that consummate sage,
In early bloom an oracle of age.
Whene’er his influence Jove vouchsafes to shower,
To bless the natal and the nuptial hour;
From the great sire transmissive to the race,
The boon devolving gives distinguish’d grace.
Such, happy Nestor! was thy glorious doom,
Around thee, full of years, thy offspring bloom.
Expert of arms, and prudent in debate;
The gifts of Heaven to guard thy hoary state.
But now let each becalm his troubled breast,
Wash, and partake serene the friendly feast.
To move thy suit, Telemachus, delay,
Till heaven’s revolving lamp restores the day.”

He said, Asphalion swift the laver brings;
Alternate, all partake the grateful springs;
Then from the rites of purity repair,
And with keen gust the savoury viands share.
Meantime, with genial joy to warm the soul,
Bright Helen mix’d a mirth inspiring bowl;
Temper’d with drugs of sovereign use, to assuage
The boiling bosom of tumultuous rage;
To clear the cloudy front of wrinkled Care,
And dry the tearful sluices of Despair;
Charm’d with that virtuous draught, the exalted mind
All sense of woe delivers to the wind.
Though on the blazing pile his parent lay,
Or a loved brother groan’d his life away,
Or darling son, oppress’d by ruffian force,
Fell breathless at his feet, a mangled corse;
From morn to eve, impassive and serene,
The man entranced would view the dreadful scene.
These drugs, so friendly to the joys of life,
Bright Helen learn’d from Thone’s imperial wife;
Who sway’d the sceptre, where prolific Nile
With various simples clothes the fatten’d soil.
With wholesome herbage mix’d, the direful bane
Of vegetable venom taints the plain;
From Paeon sprung, their patron-god imparts
To all the Pharian race his healing arts.
The beverage now prepared to inspire the feast,
The circle thus the beauteous queen addressed:

“Throned in omnipotence, supremest Jove
Tempers the fates of human race above;
By the firm sanction of his sovereign will,
Alternate are decreed our good and ill.
To feastful mirth be this white hour assign’d.
And sweet discourse, the banquet of the mind
Myself, assisting in the social joy,
Will tell Ulysses’ bold exploit in Troy,
Sole witness of the deed I now declare
Speak you (who saw) his wonders in the war.

“Seam’d o’er with wounds, which his own sabre gave,
In the vile habit of a village slave,
The foe deceived, he pass’d the tented plain,
In Troy to mingle with the hostile train.
In this attire secure from searching eyes,
Till happily piercing through the dark disguise,
The chief I challenged; he, whose practised wit
Knew all the serpent mazes of deceit,
Eludes my search; but when his form I view’d
Fresh from the bath, with fragrant oils renew’d,
His limbs in military purple dress’d,
Each brightening grace the genuine Greek confess’d.
A previous pledge of sacred faith obtain’d,
Till he the lines and Argive fleet regain’d,
To keep his stay conceal’d; the chief declared
The plans of war against the town prepared.
Exploring then the secrets of the state,
He learn’d what best might urge the Dardan fate;
And, safe returning to the Grecian host,
Sent many a shade to Pluto’s dreary coast.
Loud grief resounded through the towers of Troy,
But my pleased bosom glow’d with secret joy:
For then, with dire remorse and conscious shame
I view’d the effects of that disastrous flame,
Which, kindled by the imperious queen of love,
Constrain’d me from my native realm to rove:
And oft in bitterness of soul deplored
My absent daughter and my dearer lord;
Admired among the first of human race,
For every gift of mind and manly grace.”

“Right well (replied the king) your speech displays
The matchless merit of the chief you praise:
Heroes in various climes myself have found,
For martial deeds and depth of thought renown’d;
But Ithacus, unrivall’d in his claim,
May boast a title to the loudest fame:
In battle calm he guides the rapid storm,
Wise to resolve, and patient to perform.
What wondrous conduct in the chief appear’d,
When the vast fabric of the steed we rear’d!
Some demon, anxious for the Trojan doom,
Urged you with great Deiphobus to come,
To explore the fraud; with guile opposed to guile.
Slow-pacing thrice around the insidious pile,
Each noted leader’s name you thrice invoke,
Your accent varying as their spouses spoke!
The pleasing sounds each latent warrior warm’d,
But most Tydides’ and my heart alarm’d:
To quit the steed we both impatient press
Threatening to answer from the dark recess.
Unmoved the mind of Ithacus remain’d;
And the vain ardours of our love restrain’d;
But Anticlus, unable to control,
Spoke loud the language of his yearning soul:
Ulysses straight, with indignation fired
(For so the common care of Greece required),
Firm to his lips his forceful hands applied,
Till on his tongue the fluttering murmurs died.
Meantime Minerva, from the fraudful horse,
Back to the court of Priam bent your course.”

“Inclement fate! (Telemachus replies,)
Frail is the boasted attribute of wise:
The leader mingling with the vulgar host,
Is in the common mass of matter lost!
But now let sleep the painful waste repair
Of sad reflection and corroding care.”
He ceased; the menial fair that round her wait,
At Helen’s beck prepare the room of state;
Beneath an ample portico they spread
The downy fleece to form the slumberous bed;
And o’er soft palls of purple grain unfold
Rich tapestry, stiff with interwoven gold:
Then, through the illumined dome, to balmy rest
The obsequious herald guides each princely guest;
While to his regal bower the king ascends,
And beauteous Helen on her lord attends.
Soon as the morn, in orient purple dress’d,
Unbarr’d the portal of the roseate east,
The monarch rose; magnificent to view,
The imperial mantle o’er his vest he threw;
The glittering zone athwart his shoulders cast,
A starry falchion low-depending graced;
Clasp’d on his feet the embroidered sandals shine;
And forth he moves, majestic and divine,
Instant to young Telemachus he press’d;
And thus benevolent his speech addressed:

“Say, royal youth, sincere of soul report
Whit cause hath led you to the Spartan court?
Do public or domestic care constrain
This toilsome voyage o’er the surgy main?”

“O highly-favour’d delegate of Jove!
(Replies the prince) inflamed with filial love,
And anxious hope, to hear my parent’s doom,
A suppliant to your royal court I come:
Our sovereign seat a lewd usurping race
With lawless riot and misrule disgrace;
To pamper’d insolence devoted fall
Prime of the flock, and choicest of the stall:
For wild ambition wings their bold desire,
And all to mount the imperial bed aspire.
But prostrate I implore, O king! relate
The mournful series of my father’s fate:
Each known disaster of the man disclose,
Born by his mother to a world of woes!
Recite them; nor in erring pity fear
To wound with storied grief the filial ear.
If e’er Ulysses, to reclaim your right,
Avow’d his zeal in council or in fight,
If Phrygian camps the friendly toils attest,
To the sire’s merit give the son’s request.”

Deep from his inmost soul Atrides sigh’d,
And thus, indignant, to the prince replied:
“Heavens! would a soft, inglorious, dastard train
An absent hero’s nuptial joys profane!
So with her young, amid the woodland shades,
A timorous hind the lion’s court invades,
Leaves in the fatal lair the tender fawns,
Climbs the green cliff, or feeds the flowery lawns:
Meantime return’d, with dire remorseless sway,
The monarch-savage rends the trembling prey.
With equal fury, and with equal fame,
Ulysses soon shall reassert his claim.
O Jove supreme, whom gods and men revere!
And thou! to whom ’tis given to gild the sphere!
With power congenial join’d, propitious aid
The chief adopted by the martial maid!
Such to our wish the warrior soon restore,
As when contending on the Lesbian shore
His prowess Philomelidies confess’d,
And loud-acclaiming Greeks the victor bless’d;
Then soon the invaders of his bed and throne
Their love presumptuous shall with life atone.
With patient ear, O royal youth, attend
The storied labour of thy father’s friend:
Fruitful of deeds, the copious tale is long,
But truth severe shall dictate to my tongue:
Learn what I heard the sea-born seer relate,
Whose eye can pierce the dark recess of fate.

“Long on the Egyptian coast by calms confined,
Heaven to my fleet refused a prosperous wind;
No vows had we preferr’d, nor victims slain!
For this the gods each favouring gale restrain
Jealous, to see their high behests obey’d;
Severe, if men the eternal rights evade.
High o’er a gulfy sea, the Pharian isle
Fronts the deep roar of disemboguing Nile:
Her distance from the shore, the course begun
At dawn, and ending with the setting sun,
A galley measures; when the stiffer gales
Rise on the poop, and fully stretch the sails.
There, anchor’d vessels safe in harbour lie,
Whilst limpid springs the failing cask supply.

“And now the twentieth sun, descending, laves
His glowing axle in the western waves:
Still with expanded sails we court in vain
Propitious winds to waft us o’er the main;
And the pale mariner at once deplores
His drooping vigour and exhausted stores.
When lo! a bright cerulean form appears,
Proteus her sire divine. With pity press’d,
Me sole the daughter of the deep address’d;
What time, with hunger pined, my absent mates
Roam the wide isle in search of rural cates,
Bait the barb’d steel, and from the fishy flood
Appease the afflictive fierce desire of food.”

“‘Whoe’er thou art (the azure goddess cries)
Thy conduct ill-deserves the praise of wise:
Is death thy choice, or misery thy boast,
That here inglorious, on a barren coast,
Thy brave associates droop, a meagre train,
With famine pale, and ask thy care in vain?’
“Struck with the loud reproach, I straight reply:
‘Whate’er thy title in thy native sky,
A goddess sure! for more than moral grace
Speaks thee descendant of ethereal race;
Deem not that here of choice my fleet remains;
Some heavenly power averse my stay constrains:
O, piteous of my fate, vouchsafe to show
(For what’s sequester’d from celestial view?)
What power becalms the innavigable seas?
What guilt provokes him, and what vows appease?’

“I ceased, when affable the goddess cried:
‘Observe, and in the truths I speak confide;
The oracular seer frequents the Pharian coast,
From whose high bed my birth divine I boast;
Proteus, a name tremendous o’er the main,
The delegate of Neptune’s watery reign.
Watch with insidious care his known abode;
There fast in chains constrain the various god;
Who bound, obedient to superior force,
Unerring will prescribe your destined course.
If, studious on your realms, you then demand
Their state, since last you left your natal land,
Instant the god obsequious will disclose
Bright tracts of glory or a cloud of woes.’

“She ceased; and suppliant thus I made reply:
‘O goddess! on thy aid my hopes rely;
Dictate propitious to my duteous ear,
What arts can captivate the changeful seer;
For perilous the assay, unheard the toil,
To elude the prescience of a god by guile.’

“Thus to the goddess mild my suit I end.
Then she: ‘Obedient to my rule attend:
When through the zone of heaven the mounted sun
Hath journeyed half, and half remains to run;
The seer, while zephyrs curl the swelling deep,
Basks on the breezy shore, in grateful sleep,
His oozy limbs. Emerging from the wave,
The Phocas swift surround his rocky cave,
Frequent and full; the consecrated train
Of her, whose azure trident awes the main;
There wallowing warm, the enormous herd exhales
An oily steam, and taints the noontide gales.
To that recess, commodious for surprise,
When purple light shall next suffuse the skies,
With me repair; and from thy warrior-band
Three chosen chiefs of dauntless soul command;
Let their auxiliar force befriend the toil;
For strong the god, and perfected in guile.
Stretch’d on the shelly shore, he first surveys
The flouncing herd ascending from the seas;
Their number summ’d, reposed in sleep profound
The scaly charge their guardian god surround;
So with his battening flocks the careful swain
Abides pavilion’d on the grassy plain.
With powers united, obstinately bold,
Invade him, couch’d amid the scaly fold;
Instant he wears, elusive of the rape,
The mimic force of every savage shape;
Or glides with liquid lapse a murmuring stream,
Or, wrapp’d in flame, he glows at every limb.
Yet, still retentive, with redoubled might,
Through each vain passive form constrain his flight
But when, his native shape renamed, he stands
Patient of conquest, and your cause demands;
The cause that urged the bold attempt declare,
And soothe the vanquish’d with a victor’s prayer.
The bands releas’d, implore the seer to say
What godhead interdicts the watery way.
Who, straight propitious, in prophetic strain
Will teach you to repass the unmeasured main.’
She ceased, and bounding from the shelfy shore,
Round the descending nymph the waves resounding roar.

“High wrapp’d in wonder of the future deed,
with joy impetuous to the port I speed:
The wants of nature with repast suffice,
Till night with grateful shade involved the skies,
And shed ambrosial dews. Fast by the deep,
Along the tented shore, in balmy sleep,
Our cares were lost. When o’er the eastern lawn,
In saffron robes, the daughter of the dawn
Advanced her rosy steps, before the bay
Due ritual honours to the gods I pay;
Then seek the place the sea-born nymph assign’d,
With three associates of undaunted mind.
Arrived, to form along the appointed strand
For each a bed, she scoops the hilly sand;
Then, from her azure cave the finny spoils
Of four vast Phocae takes, to veil her wiles;
Beneath the finny spoils extended prone,
Hard toil! the prophet’s piercing eye to shun;
New from the corse, the scaly frauds diffuse
Unsavoury stench of oil, and brackish ooze;
But the bright sea-maid’s gentle power implored,
With nectar’d drops the sickening sense restored.

“Thus till the sun had travell’d half the skies,
Ambush’d we lie, and wait the bold emprise;
When, thronging quick to bask in open air,
The flocks of ocean to the strand repair;
Couch’d on the sunny sand, the monsters sleep;
Then Proteus, mounting from the hoary deep,
Surveys his charge, unknowing of deceit;
(In order told, we make the sum complete.)
Pleased with the false review, secure he lies,
And leaden slumbers press his drooping eyes.
Rushing impetuous forth, we straight prepare
A furious onset with the sound of war,
And shouting seize the god; our force to evade,
His various arts he soon resumes in aid;
A lion now, he curls a surgy mane;
Sudden our hands a spotted pard restrain;
Then, arm’d with tusks, and lightning in his eyes,
A boar’s obscener shape the god belies;
On spiry volumes, there a dragon rides;
Here, from our strict embrace a stream he glides.
At last, sublime, his stately growth he rears
A tree, and well-dissembled foliage wears.
Vain efforts with superior power compress’d,
Me with reluctance thus the seer address’d;
‘Say, son of Atreus, say what god inspired
This daring fraud, and what the boon desired?’
I thus: ‘O thou, whose certain eye foresees
The fix’d event of fate’s remote decrees;
After long woes, and various toil endured,
Still on this desert isle my fleet is moor’d,
Unfriended of the gales. All-knowing, say,
What godhead interdicts the watery way?
What vows repentant will the power appease,
To speed a prosperous voyage o’er the seas.’

“‘To Jove (with stern regard the god replies)
And all the offended synod of the skies,
Just hecatombs with due devotion slain,
Thy guilt absolved, a prosperous voyage gain.
To the firm sanction of thy fate attend!
An exile thou, nor cheering face of friend,
Nor sight of natal shore, nor regal dome,
Shalt yet enjoy, but still art doom’d to roam.
Once more the Nile, who from the secret source
Of Jove’s high seat descends with sweepy force,
Must view his billows white beneath thy oar,
And altars blaze along his sanguine shore.
Then will the gods with holy pomp adored,
To thy long vows a safe return accord.’

“He ceased: heart wounded with afflictive pain,
(Doom’d to repeat the perils of the main,
A shelfy track and long!) ‘O seer’ I cry,
‘To the stern sanction of the offended sky
My prompt obedience bows. But deign to say
What fate propitious, or what dire dismay,
Sustain those peers, the relics of our host,
Whom I with Nestor on the Phrygian coast
Embracing left? Must I the warriors weep,
Whelm’d in the bottom of the monstrous deep?
Or did the kind domestic friend deplore
The breathless heroes on their native shore?

“‘Press not too far,’ replied the god: ‘but cease
To know what, known, will violate thy peace;
Too curious of their doom! with friendly woe
Thy breast will heave, and tears eternal flow.
Part live! the rest, a lamentable train!
Range the dark bounds of Pluto’s dreary reign.
Two, foremost in the roll of Mars renown’d,
Whose arms with conquest in thy cause were crown’d,
Fell by disastrous fate: by tempests toss’d,
A third lives wretched on a distant coast.

“By Neptune rescued from Minerva’s hate,
On Gyrae, safe Oilean Ajax sate,
His ship o’erwhelm’d; but, frowning on the floods,
Impious he roar’d defiance to the gods;
To his own prowess all the glory gave:
The power defrauding who vouchsafed to save.
This heard the raging ruler of the main;
His spear, indignant for such high disdain,
He launched; dividing with his forky mace
The aërial summit from the marble base:
The rock rush’d seaward, with impetuous roar
Ingulf’d, and to the abyss the boaster bore.

“By Juno’s guardian aid, the watery vast,
Secure of storms, your royal brother pass’d,
Till, coasting nigh the cape where Malen shrouds
Her spiry cliffs amid surrounding clouds,
A whirling gust tumultuous from the shore
Across the deep his labouring vessel bore.
In an ill-fated hour the coast he gain’d,
Where late in regal pomp Thyestes reigned;
But, when his hoary honours bow’d to fate,
Ægysthus govern’d in paternal state,
The surges now subside, the tempest ends;
From his tall ship the king of men descends;
There fondly thinks the gods conclude his toil:
Far from his own domain salutes the soil;
With rapture oft the verge of Greece reviews,
And the dear turf with tears of joy bedews.
Him, thus exulting on the distant stand,
A spy distinguish’d from his airy stand;
To bribe whose vigilance, Ægysthus told
A mighty sum of ill-persuading gold:
There watch’d this guardian of his guilty fear,
Till the twelfth moon had wheel’d her pale career;
And now, admonish’d by his eye, to court
With terror wing’d conveys the dread report.
Of deathful arts expert, his lord employs
The ministers of blood in dark surprise;
And twenty youths, in radiant mail incased,
Close ambush’d nigh the spacious hall he placed.
Then bids prepare the hospitable treat:
Vain shows of love to veil his felon hate!
To grace the victor’s welcome from the wars,
A train of coursers and triumphal cars
Magnificent he leads: the royal guest,
Thoughtless of ill, accepts the fraudful feast.
The troop forth-issuing from the dark recess,
With homicidal rage the king oppress!
So, whilst he feeds luxurious in the stall,
The sovereign of the herd is doomed to fall,
The partners of his fame and toils at Troy,
Around their lord, a mighty ruin, lie:
Mix’d with the brave, the base invaders bleed;
Ægysthus sole survives to boast the deed.’

“He said: chill horrors shook my shivering soul,
Rack’d with convulsive pangs in dust I roll;
And hate, in madness of extreme despair,
To view the sun, or breathe the vital air.
But when, superior to the rage of woe,
I stood restored and tears had ceased to flow,
Lenient of grief the pitying god began:
‘Forget the brother, and resume the man.
To Fate’s supreme dispose the dead resign,
That care be Fate’s, a speedy passage thine
Still lives the wretch who wrought the death deplored,
But lives a victim for thy vengeful sword;
Unless with filial rage Orestes glow,
And swift prevent the meditated blow:
You timely will return a welcome guest,
With him to share the sad funereal feast.’

“He said: new thoughts my beating heart employ,
My gloomy soul receives a gleam of joy.
Fair hope revives; and eager I address’d
The prescient godhead to reveal the rest:
‘The doom decreed of those disastrous two
I’ve heard with pain, but oh! the tale pursue;
What third brave son of Mars the Fates constrain
To roam the howling desert of the main;
Or, in eternal shade of cold he lies,
Provoke new sorrows from these grateful eyes.’

“‘That chief (rejoin’d the god) his race derives
From Ithaca, and wondrous woes survives;
Laertes’ son: girt with circumfluous tides,
He still calamitous constraint abides.
Him in Calypso’s cave of late I view’d,
When streaming grief his faded cheek bedow’d.
But vain his prayer, his arts are vain, to move
The enamour’d goddess, or elude her love:
His vessel sunk, and dear companions lost,
He lives reluctant on a foreign coast.
But oh, beloved by Heaven! reserved to thee
A happier lot the smiling Fates decree:
Free from that law, beneath whose mortal sway
Matter is changed, and varying forms decay,
Elysium shall be thine: the blissful plains
Of utmost earth, where Rhadamanthus reigns.
Joys ever young, unmix’d with pain or fear,
Fill the wide circle of the eternal year:
Stern winter smiles on that auspicious clime:
The fields are florid with unfading prime;
From the bleak pole no winds inclement blow,
Mould the round hail, or flake the fleecy snow;
But from the breezy deep the blest inhale
The fragrant murmurs of the western gale.
This grace peculiar will the gods afford
To thee, the son of Jove, and beauteous Helen’s lord.’

“He ceased, and plunging in the vast profound,
Beneath the god and whirling billows bound.
Then speeding back, involved in various thought,
My friends attending at the shore I sought,
Arrived, the rage of hunger we control
Till night with silent shade invests the pole;
Then lose the cares of life in pleasing rest.
Soon as the morn reveals the roseate east,
With sails we wing the masts, our anchors weigh,
Unmoor the fleet, and rush into the sea.
Ranged on the banks, beneath our equal oars
White curl the waves, and the vex’d ocean roars
Then, steering backward from the Pharian isle,
We gain the stream of Jove-descended Nile;
There quit the ships, and on the destined shore
With ritual hecatombs the gods adore;
Their wrath atoned, to Agamemnon’s name
A cenotaph I raise of deathless fame.
These rites to piety and grief discharged,
The friendly gods a springing gale enlarged;
The fleet swift tilting o’er the surges flew,
Till Grecian cliffs appear’d a blissful view!

“Thy patient ear hath heard me long relate
A story, fruitful of disastrous fate.
And now, young prince, indulge my fond request;
Be Sparta honoured with his royal guest,
Till, from his eastern goal, the joyous sun
His twelfth diurnal race begins to run.
Meantime my train the friendly gifts prepare,
The sprightly coursers and a polish’d car;
With these a goblet of capacious mould,
Figured with art to dignify the gold
(Form’d for libation to the gods), shall prove
A pledge and monument of sacred love.”

“My quick return (young Ithacus rejoin’d),
Damps the warm wishes of my raptured mind;
Did not my fate my needful haste constrain,
Charm’d by your speech so graceful and humane,
Lost in delight the circling year would roll,
While deep attention fix’d my listening soul.
But now to Pyle permit my destined way,
My loved associates chide my long delay:
In dear remembrance of your royal grace,
I take the present of the promised vase;
The coursers, for the champaign sports retain;
That gift our barren rocks will render vain:
Horrid with cliffs, our meagre land allows
Thin herbage for the mountain goat to browse,
But neither mead nor plain supplies, to feed
The sprightly courser, or indulge his speed:
To sea-surrounded realms the gods assign
Small tract of fertile lawn, the least to mine.”

His hand the king with tender passion press’d,
And, smiling, thus the royal youth address’d:
“O early worth! a soul so wise, and young,
Proclaims you from the sage Ulysses sprung.
Selected from my stores, of matchless price,
An urn shall recompense your prudent choice;
By Vulcan’s art, the verge with gold enchased.
A pledge the sceptred power of Sidon gave,
When to his realm I plough’d the orient wave.”

Thus they alternate; while, with artful care,
The menial train the regal feast prepare.
The firstlings of the flock are doom’d to die:
Rich fragrant wines the cheering bowl supply;
A female band the gift of Ceres bring;
And the gilt roofs with genial triumph ring.

Meanwhile, in Ithaca, the suitor powers
In active games divide their jovial hours;
In areas varied with mosaic art,
Some whirl the disk, and some the javelin dart,
Aside, sequester’d from the vast resort,
Antinous sole spectator of the sport;
With great Eurymachus, of worth confess’d,
And high descent, superior to the rest;
Whom young Noëmon lowly thus address’d:—

“My ship, equipp’d within the neighboring port,
The prince, departing for the Pylian court,
Requested for his speed; but, courteous, say
When steers he home, or why this long delay?
For Elis I should sail with utmost speed,
To import twelve mares which there luxurious feed,
And twelve young mules, a strong laborious race,
New to the plow, unpractised in the trace.”

Unknowing of the course to Pyle design’d,
A sudden horror seized on either mind;
The prince in rural bower they fondly thought,
Numbering his flocks and herds, not far remote.
“Relate (Antinous cries), devoid of guile,
When spread the prince his sale for distant Pyle?
Did chosen chiefs across the gulfy main
Attend his voyage, or domestic train?
Spontaneous did you speed his secret course,
Or was the vessel seized by fraud or force?”

“With willing duty, not reluctant mind
(Noëmon cried), the vessel was resign’d,
Who, in the balance, with the great affairs
Of courts presume to weigh their private cares?
With him, the peerage next in power to you;
And Mentor, captain of the lordly crew,
Or some celestial in his reverend form,
Safe from the secret rock and adverse storm,
Pilots the course; for when the glimmering ray
Of yester dawn disclosed the tender day,
Mentor himself I saw, and much admired,”
Then ceased the youth, and from the court retired.

Confounded and appall’d, the unfinish’d game
The suitors quit, and all to council came.
Antinous first the assembled peers address’d.
Rage sparkling in his eyes, and burning in his breast

“O shame to manhood! shall one daring boy
The scheme of all our happiness destroy?
Fly unperceived, seducing half the flower
Of nobles, and invite a foreign power?
The ponderous engine raised to crush us all,
Recoiling, on his head is sure to fall.
Instant prepare me, on the neighbouring strand,
With twenty chosen mates a vessel mann’d;
For ambush’d close beneath the Samian shore
His ship returning shall my spies explore;
He soon his rashness shall with life atone,
Seek for his father’s fate, but find his own.”

With vast applause the sentence all approve;
Then rise, and to the feastful hall remove;
Swift to the queen the herald Medon ran,
Who heard the consult of the dire divan:
Before her dome the royal matron stands,
And thus the message of his haste demands;

“What will the suitors? must my servant-train
The allotted labours of the day refrain,
For them to form some exquisite repast?
Heaven grant this festival may prove their last!
Or, if they still must live, from me remove
The double plague of luxury and love!
Forbear, ye sons of insolence! forbear,
In riot to consume a wretched heir.
In the young soul illustrious thought to raise,
Were ye not tutor’d with Ulysses’ praise?
Have not your fathers oft my lord defined,
Gentle of speech, beneficent of mind?
Some kings with arbitrary rage devour,
Or in their tyrant-minions vest the power;
Ulysses let no partial favours fall,
The people’s parent, he protected all;
But absent now, perfidious and ingrate!
His stores ye ravage, and usurp his state.”

He thus: “O were the woes you speak the worst!
They form a deed more odious and accursed;
More dreadful than your boding soul divines;
But pitying Jove avert the dire designs!
The darling object of your royal care
Is marked to perish in a deathful snare;
Before he anchors in his native port,
From Pyle re-sailing and the Spartan court;
Horrid to speak! in ambush is decreed
The hope and heir of Ithaca to bleed!”

Sudden she sunk beneath the weighty woes,
The vital streams a chilling horror froze;
The big round tear stands trembling in her eye,
And on her tongue imperfect accents die.
At length in tender language interwove
With sighs, she thus expressed her anxious love;
“Why rarely would my son his fate explore,
Ride the wild waves, and quit the safer shore?
Did he with all the greatly wretched, crave
A blank oblivion, and untimely grave?”

“Tis not (replied the sage) to Medon given
To know, if some inhabitant of heaven
In his young breast the daring thought inspired
Or if, alone with filial duty fired,
The winds and waves he tempts in early bloom,
Studious to learn his absent father’s doom.”

The sage retired: unable to control
The mighty griefs that swell her labouring soul
Rolling convulsive on the floor is seen
The piteous object of a prostrate queen.
Words to her dumb complaint a pause supplies,
And breath, to waste in unavailing cries.
Around their sovereign wept the menial fair,
To whom she thus address’d her deep despair:

“Behold a wretch whom all the gods consign
To woe! Did ever sorrows equal mine?
Long to my joys my dearest lord is lost,
His country’s buckler, and the Grecian boast;
Now from my fond embrace, by tempests torn,
Our other column of the state is borne;
Nor took a kind adieu, nor sought consent!—
Unkind confederates in his dire intent!
Ill suits it with your shows of duteous zeal,
From me the purposed voyage to conceal;
Though at the solemn midnight hour he rose,
Why did you fear to trouble my repose?
He either had obey’d my fond desire,
Or seen his mother pierced with grief expire.
Bid Dolius quick attend, the faithful slave
Whom to my nuptial train Icarius gave
To tend the fruit groves: with incessant speed
He shall this violence of death decreed
To good Laertes tell. Experienced age
May timely intercept the ruffian rage.
Convene the tribes the murderous plot reveal,
And to their power to save his race appeal.”

Then Euryclea thus: “My dearest dread;
Though to the sword I bow this hoary head,
Or if a dungeon be the pain decreed,
I own me conscious of the unpleasing deed;
Auxiliar to his flight, my aid implored,
With wine and viands I the vessel stored;
A solemn oath, imposed, the secret seal’d,
Till the twelfth dawn the light of day reveal’d.
Dreading the effect of a fond mother’s fear,
He dared not violate your royal ear.
But bathe, and, in imperial robes array’d,
Pay due devotions to the martial maid,
And rest affianced in her guardian aid.
Send not to good Laertes, nor engage
In toils of state the miseries of age:
Tis impious to surmise the powers divine
To ruin doom the Jove-descended line;
Long shall the race of just Arcesius reign,
And isles remote enlarge his old domain.”

The queen her speech with calm attention hears,
Her eyes restrain the silver-streaming tears:
She bathes, and robed, the sacred dome ascends;
Her pious speed a female train attends:
The salted cakes in canisters are laid,
And thus the queen invokes Minerva’s aid;

“Daughter divine of Jove, whose arm can wield
The avenging bolt, and shake the dreadful shield
If e’er Ulysses to thy fane preferr’d
The best and choicest of his flock and herd;
Hear, goddess, hear, by those oblations won;
And for the pious sire preserve the son;
His wish’d return with happy power befriend,
And on the suitors let thy wrath descend.”

She ceased; shrill ecstasies of joy declare
The favouring goddess present to the prayer;
The suitors heard, and deem’d the mirthful voice
A signal of her hymeneal choice;
Whilst one most jovial thus accosts the board:

“Too late the queen selects a second lord;
In evil hour the nuptial rite intends,
When o’er her son disastrous death impends.”
Thus he, unskill’d of what the fates provide!
But with severe rebuke Antinous cried:

“These empty vaunts will make the voyage vain:
Alarm not with discourse the menial train:
The great event with silent hope attend,
Our deeds alone our counsel must commend.”
His speech thus ended short, he frowning rose,
And twenty chiefs renowned for valour chose;
Down to the strand he speeds with haughty strides,
Where anchor’d in the bay the vessel rides,
Replete with mail and military store,
In all her tackle trim to quit the shore.
The desperate crew ascend, unfurl the sails
(The seaward prow invites the tardy gales);
Then take repast till Hesperus display’d
His golden circlet, in the western shade.

Meantime the queen, without reflection due,
Heart-wounded, to the bed of state withdrew:
In her sad breast the prince’s fortunes roll,
And hope and doubt alternate seize her soul.
So when the woodman’s toil her cave surrounds,
And with the hunter’s cry the grove resounds,
With grief and rage the mother-lion stung,
Fearless herself, yet trembles for her young,
While pensive in the silent slumberous shade,
Sleep’s gentle powers her drooping eyes invade;
Minerva, life-like, on embodied air
Impress’d the form of Iphthima the fair;
(Icarius’ daughter she, whose blooming charms
Allured Eumelus to her virgin arms;
A sceptred lord, who o’er the fruitful plain
Of Thessaly wide stretched his ample reign:)
As Pallas will’d, along the sable skies,
To calm the queen, the phantom sister flies.
Swift on the regal dome, descending right,
The bolted valves are pervious to her flight.
Close to her head the pleasing vision stands,
And thus performs Minerva’s high commands

“O why, Penelope, this causeless fear,
To render sleep’s soft blessing unsincere?
Alike devote to sorrow’s dire extreme
The day-reflection, and the midnight-dream!
Thy son the gods propitious will restore,
And bid thee cease his absence to deplore.”

To whom the queen (whilst yet in pensive mind
Was in the silent gates of sleep confined):
“O sister to my soul forever dear,
Why this first visit to reprove my fear?
How in a realm so distant should you know
From what deep source my ceaseless sorrows flow?
To all my hope my royal lord is lost,
His country’s buckler, and the Grecian boast;
And with consummate woe to weigh me down,
The heir of all his honours and his crown,
My darling son is fled! an easy prey
To the fierce storms, or men more fierce than they;
Who, in a league of blood associates sworn,
Will intercept the unwary youth’s return.”

“Courage resume (the shadowy form replied);
In the protecting care of Heaven confide;
On him attends the blue eyed martial maid:
What earthly can implore a surer aid?
Me now the guardian goddess deigns to send,
To bid thee patient his return attend.”

The queen replies: “If in the blest abodes,
A goddess, thou hast commerce with the gods;
Say, breathes my lord the blissful realm of light,
Or lies he wrapp’d in ever-during night?”

“Inquire not of his doom, (the phantom cries,)
I speak not all the counsel of the skies;
Nor must indulge with vain discourse, or long,
The windy satisfaction of the tongue.”

Swift through the valves the visionary fair
Repass’d, and viewless mix’d with common air.
The queen awakes, deliver’d of her woes;
With florid joy her heart dilating glows:
The vision, manifest of future fate,
Makes her with hope her son’s arrival wait.

Meantime the suitors plough the watery plain,
Telemachus in thought already slain!
When sight of lessening Ithaca was lost
Their sail directed for the Samian coast
A small but verdant isle appear’d in view,
And Asteris the advancing pilot knew;
An ample port the rocks projected form,
To break the rolling waves and ruffling storm:
That safe recess they gain with happy speed,
And in close ambush wait the murderous deed.







The saffron morn, with early blushes spread,
Now rose refulgent from Tithonus’ bed;
With new-born day to gladden mortal sight,
And gild the courts of heaven with sacred light.
Then met the eternal synod of the sky,
Before the god, who thunders from on high,
Supreme in might, sublime in majesty.
Pallas, to these, deplores the unequal fates
Of wise Ulysses and his toils relates:
Her hero’s danger touch’d the pitying power,
The nymph’s seducements, and the magic bower.
Thus she began her plaint: “Immortal Jove!
And you who fill the blissful seats above!
Let kings no more with gentle mercy sway,
Or bless a people willing to obey,
But crush the nations with an iron rod,
And every monarch be the scourge of God.
If from your thoughts Ulysses you remove,
Who ruled his subjects with a father’s love,
Sole in an isle, encircled by the main,
Abandon’d, banish’d from his native reign,
Unbless’d he sighs, detained by lawless charms,
And press’d unwilling in Calypso’s arms.
Nor friends are there, nor vessels to convey,
Nor oars to cut the immeasurable way.
And now fierce traitors, studious to destroy
His only son, their ambush’d fraud employ;
Who, pious, following his great father’s fame,
To sacred Pylos and to Sparta came.”

“What words are these? (replied the power who forms
The clouds of night, and darkens heaven with storms;)
Is not already in thy soul decreed,
The chief’s return shall make the guilty bleed?
What cannot Wisdom do? Thou may’st restore
The son in safety to his native shore;
While the fell foes, who late in ambush lay,
With fraud defeated measure back their way.”

Then thus to Hermes the command was given:
“Hermes, thou chosen messenger of heaven!
Go, to the nymph be these our orders borne
’Tis Jove’s decree, Ulysses shall return:
The patient man shall view his old abodes,
Nor helped by mortal hand, nor guiding gods
In twice ten days shall fertile Scheria find,
Alone, and floating to the wave and wind.
The bold Phæacians there, whose haughty line
Is mixed with gods, half human, half divine,
The chief shall honour as some heavenly guest,
And swift transport him to his place of rest,
His vessels loaded with a plenteous store
Of brass, of vestures, and resplendent ore
(A richer prize than if his joyful isle
Received him charged with Ilion’s noble spoil),
His friends, his country, he shall see, though late:
Such is our sovereign will, and such is fate.”

He spoke. The god who mounts the winged winds
Fast to his feet the golden pinions binds,
That high through fields of air his flight sustain
O’er the wide earth, and o’er the boundless main:
He grasps the wand that causes sleep to fly,
Or in soft slumber seals the wakeful eye;
Then shoots from heaven to high Pieria’s steep,
And stoops incumbent on the rolling deep.
So watery fowl, that seek their fishy food,
With wings expanded o’er the foaming flood,
Now sailing smooth the level surface sweep,
Now dip their pinions in the briny deep;
Thus o’er the world of waters Hermes flew,
Till now the distant island rose in view:
Then, swift ascending from the azure wave,
He took the path that winded to the cave.
Large was the grot, in which the nymph he found
(The fair-hair’d nymph with every beauty crown’d).
The cave was brighten’d with a rising blaze;
Cedar and frankincense, an odorous pile,
Flamed on the hearth, and wide perfumed the isle;
While she with work and song the time divides,
And through the loom the golden shuttle guides.
Without the grot a various sylvan scene
Appear’d around, and groves of living green;
Poplars and alders ever quivering play’d,
And nodding cypress form’d a fragrant shade:
On whose high branches, waving with the storm,
The birds of broadest wing their mansions form,—
The chough, the sea-mew, the loquacious crow,—
and scream aloft, and skim the deeps below.
Depending vines the shelving cavern screen.
With purple clusters blushing through the green.
Four limpid fountains from the clefts distil:
And every fountain pours a several rill,
In mazy windings wandering down the hill:
Where bloomy meads with vivid greens were crown’d,
And glowing violets threw odours round.
A scene, where, if a god should cast his sight,
A god might gaze, and wander with delight!
Joy touch’d the messenger of heaven: he stay’d
Entranced, and all the blissful haunts surveyed.
Him, entering in the cave, Calypso knew;
For powers celestial to each other’s view
Stand still confess’d, though distant far they lie
To habitants of earth, or sea, or sky.
But sad Ulysses, by himself apart,
Pour’d the big sorrows of his swelling heart;
All on the lonely shore he sate to weep,
And roll’d his eyes around the restless deep:
Toward his loved coast he roll’d his eyes in vain,
Till, dimm’d with rising grief, they stream’d again.

Now graceful seated on her shining throne,
To Hermes thus the nymph divine begun:

“God of the golden wand! on what behest
Arrivest thou here, an unexpected guest?
Loved as thou art, thy free injunctions lay;
’Tis mine with joy and duty to obey.
Till now a stranger, in a happy hour
Approach, and taste the dainties of my bower.”

Thus having spoke, the nymph the table spread
(Ambrosial cates, with nectar rosy-red);
Hermes the hospitable rite partook,
Divine refection! then, recruited, spoke:

“What moves this journey from my native sky,
A goddess asks, nor can a god deny.
Hear then the truth. By mighty Jove’s command
Unwilling have I trod this pleasing land:
For who, self-moved, with weary wing would sweep
Such length of ocean and unmeasured deep;
A world of waters! far from all the ways
Where men frequent, or sacred altars blaze!
But to Jove’s will submission we must pay;
What power so great to dare to disobey?
A man, he says, a man resides with thee,
Of all his kind most worn with misery.
The Greeks, (whose arms for nine long year employ’d
Their force on Ilion, in the tenth destroy’d,)
At length, embarking in a luckless hour,
With conquest proud, incensed Minerva’s power:
Hence on the guilty race her vengeance hurl’d,
With storms pursued them through the liquid world.
There all his vessels sunk beneath the wave!
There all his dear companions found their grave!
Saved from the jaws of death by Heaven’s decree,
The tempest drove him to these shores and thee.
Him, Jove now orders to his native lands
Straight to dismiss: so destiny commands:
Impatient Fate his near return attends,
And calls him to his country, and his friends.”

E’en to her inmost soul the goddess shook;
Then thus her anguish, and her passion broke:
“Ungracious gods! with spite and envy cursed!
Still to your own ethereal race the worst!
Ye envy mortal and immortal joy,
And love, the only sweet of life destroy,
Did ever goddess by her charms engage
A favour’d mortal, and not feel your rage?
So when Aurora sought Orion’s love,
Her joys disturbed your blissful hours above,
Till, in Ortygia Dian’s winged dart
Had pierced the hapless hunter to the heart,
So when the covert of the thrice-eared field
Saw stately Ceres to her passion yield,
Scarce could Iasion taste her heavenly charms,
But Jove’s swift lightning scorched him in her arms.
And is it now my turn, ye mighty powers!
Am I the envy of your blissful bowers?
A man, an outcast to the storm and wave,
It was my crime to pity, and to save;
When he who thunders rent his bark in twain,
And sunk his brave companions in the main,
Alone, abandon’d, in mid-ocean tossed,
The sport of winds, and driven from every coast,
Hither this man of miseries I led,
Received the friendless, and the hungry fed;
Nay promised (vainly promised) to bestow
Immortal life, exempt from age and woe.
’Tis past-and Jove decrees he shall remove;
Gods as we are, we are but slaves to Jove.
Go then he must (he must, if he ordain,
Try all those dangers, all those deeps, again);
But never, never shall Calypso send
To toils like these her husband and her friend.
What ships have I, what sailors to convey,
What oars to cut the long laborious way?
Yet I’ll direct the safest means to go;
That last advice is all I can bestow.”

To her the power who hears the charming rod;
“Dismiss the man, nor irritate the god;
Prevent the rage of him who reigns above,
For what so dreadful as the wrath of Jove?”
Thus having said, he cut the cleaving sky,
And in a moment vanished from her eye,
The nymph, obedient to divine command,
To seek Ulysses, paced along the sand,
Him pensive on the lonely beach she found,
With streaming eyes in briny torrents drown’d,
And inly pining for his native shore;
For now the soft enchantress pleased no more;
For now, reluctant, and constrained by charms,
Absent he lay in her desiring arms,
In slumber wore the heavy night away,
On rocks and shores consumed the tedious day;
There sate all desolate, and sighed alone,
With echoing sorrows made the mountains groan.
And roll’d his eyes o’er all the restless main,
Till, dimmed with rising grief, they streamed again.

Here, on his musing mood the goddess press’d,
Approaching soft, and thus the chief address’d:
“Unhappy man! to wasting woes a prey,
No more in sorrows languish life away:
Free as the winds I give thee now to rove:
Go, fell the timber of yon lofty grove,
And form a raft, and build the rising ship,
Sublime to bear thee o’er the gloomy deep.
To store the vessel let the care be mine,
With water from the rock and rosy wine,
And life-sustaining bread, and fair array,
And prosperous gales to waft thee on the way.
These, if the gods with my desire comply
(The gods, alas, more mighty far than I,
And better skill’d in dark events to come),
In peace shall land thee at thy native home.”

With sighs Ulysses heard the words she spoke,
Then thus his melancholy silence broke:
“Some other motive, goddess! sways thy mind
(Some close design, or turn of womankind),
Nor my return the end, nor this the way,
On a slight raft to pass the swelling sea,
Huge, horrid, vast! where scarce in safety sails
The best-built ship, though Jove inspires the gales.
The bold proposal how shall I fulfil,
Dark as I am, unconscious of thy will?
Swear, then, thou mean’st not what my soul forebodes;
Swear by the solemn oath that binds the gods.”

Him, while he spoke, with smiles Calypso eyed,
And gently grasp’d his hand, and thus replied:
“This shows thee, friend, by old experience taught,
And learn’d in all the wiles of human thought,
How prone to doubt, how cautious, are the wise!
But hear, O earth, and hear, ye sacred skies!
And thou, O Styx! whose formidable floods
Glide through the shades, and bind the attesting gods!
No form’d design, no meditated end,
Lurks in the counsel of thy faithful friend;
Kind the persuasion, and sincere my aim;
The same my practice, were my fate the same.
Heaven has not cursed me with a heart of steel,
But given the sense to pity, and to feel.”

Thus having said, the goddess marched before:
He trod her footsteps in the sandy shore.
At the cool cave arrived, they took their state;
He filled the throne where Mercury had sate.
For him the nymph a rich repast ordains,
Such as the mortal life of man sustains;
Before herself were placed the the cates divine,
Ambrosial banquet and celestial wine.
Their hunger satiate, and their thirst repress’d,
Thus spoke Calypso to her godlike guest:

“Ulysses! (with a sigh she thus began;)
O sprung from gods! in wisdom more than man!
Is then thy home the passion of thy heart?
Thus wilt thou leave me, are we thus to part?
Farewell! and ever joyful mayst thou be,
Nor break the transport with one thought of me.
But ah, Ulysses! wert thou given to know
What Fate yet dooms these still to undergo,
Thy heart might settle in this scene of ease.
And e’en these slighted charms might learn to please.
A willing goddess, and immortal life,
Might banish from thy mind an absent wife.
Am I inferior to a mortal dame?
Less soft my feature less august my frame?
Or shall the daughters of mankind compare
Their earth born beauties with the heavenly fair?”

“Alas! for this (the prudent man replies)
Against Ulysses shall thy anger rise?
Loved and adored, O goddess as thou art,
Forgive the weakness of a human heart.
Though well I see thy graces far above
The dear, though mortal, object of my love,
Of youth eternal well the difference know,
And the short date of fading charms below;
Yet every day, while absent thus I roam,
I languish to return and die at home.
Whate’er the gods shall destine me to bear;
In the black ocean or the watery war,
’Tis mine to master with a constant mind;
Inured to perils, to the worst resign’d,
By seas, by wars, so many dangers run;
Still I can suffer; their high will he done!”

Thus while he spoke, the beamy sun descends,
And rising night her friendly shade extends,
To the close grot the lonely pair remove,
And slept delighted with the gifts of love.
When rosy morning call’d them from their rest,
Ulysses robed him in the cloak and vest.
The nymph’s fair head a veil transparent graced,
Her swelling loins a radiant zone embraced
With flowers of gold; an under robe, unbound,
In snowy waves flow’d glittering on the ground.
Forth issuing thus, she gave him first to wield
A weighty axe with truest temper steeled,
And double-edged; the handle smooth and plain,
Wrought of the clouded olive’s easy grain;
And next, a wedge to drive with sweepy sway
Then to the neighboring forest led the way.
On the lone island’s utmost verge there stood
Of poplars, pine, and firs, a lofty wood,
Whose leafless summits to the skies aspire,
Scorch’d by the sun, or seared by heavenly fire
(Already dried). These pointing out to view,
The nymph just show’d him, and with tears withdrew.

Now toils the hero: trees on trees o’erthrown
Fall crackling round him, and the forests groan:
Sudden, full twenty on the plain are strow’d,
And lopp’d and lighten’d of their branchy load.
At equal angles these disposed to join,
He smooth’d and squared them by the rule and line,
(The wimbles for the work Calypso found)
With those he pierced them and with clinchers bound.
Long and capacious as a shipwright forms
Some bark’s broad bottom to out-ride the storms,
So large he built the raft; then ribb’d it strong
From space to space, and nail’d the planks along;
These form’d the sides: the deck he fashion’d last;
Then o’er the vessel raised the taper mast,
With crossing sail-yards dancing in the wind;
And to the helm the guiding rudder join’d
(With yielding osiers fenced, to break the force
Of surging waves, and steer the steady course).
Thy loom, Calypso, for the future sails
Supplied the cloth, capacious of the gales.
With stays and cordage last he rigged the ship,
And, roll’d on levers, launch’d her in the deep.

Four days were pass’d, and now the work complete,
Shone the fifth morn, when from her sacred seat
The nymph dismiss’d him (odorous garments given),
And bathed in fragrant oils that breathed of heaven:
Then fill’d two goatskins with her hands divine,
With water one, and one with sable wine:
Of every kind, provisions heaved aboard;
And the full decks with copious viands stored.
The goddess, last, a gentle breeze supplies,
To curl old Ocean, and to warm the skies.

And now, rejoicing in the prosperous gales,
With beating heart Ulysses spreads his sails;
Placed at the helm he sate, and mark’d the skies,
Nor closed in sleep his ever-watchful eyes.
There view’d the Pleiads, and the Northern Team,
And great Orion’s more refulgent beam.
To which, around the axle of the sky,
The Bear, revolving, points his golden eye:
Who shines exalted on the ethereal plain,
Nor bathes his blazing forehead in the main.
Far on the left those radiant fires to keep
The nymph directed, as he sail’d the deep.
Full seventeen nights he cut the foaming way:
The distant land appear’d the following day:
Then swell’d to sight Phæacia’s dusky coast,
And woody mountains, half in vapours lost;
That lay before him indistinct and vast,
Like a broad shield amid the watery waste.

But him, thus voyaging the deeps below,
From far, on Solyme’s aërial brow,
The king of ocean saw, and seeing burn’d
(From Æthiopia’s happy climes return’d);
The raging monarch shook his azure head,
And thus in secret to his soul he said:
“Heavens! how uncertain are the powers on high!
Is then reversed the sentence of the sky,
In one man’s favour; while a distant guest
I shared secure the Æthiopian feast?
Behold how near Phæacia’s land he draws;
The land affix’d by Fate’s eternal laws
To end his toils. Is then our anger vain?
No; if this sceptre yet commands the main.”

He spoke, and high the forky trident hurl’d,
Rolls clouds on clouds, and stirs the watery world,
At once the face of earth and sea deforms,
Swells all the winds, and rouses all the storms.
Down rushed the night: east, west, together roar;
And south and north roll mountains to the shore.
Then shook the hero, to despair resign’d,
And question’d thus his yet unconquer’d mind;

“Wretch that I am! what farther fates attend
This life of toils, and what my destined end?
Too well, alas! the island goddess knew
On the black sea what perils should ensue.
New horrors now this destined head inclose;
Untill’d is yet the measure of my woes;
With what a cloud the brows of heaven are crown’d;
What raging winds! what roaring waters round!
’Tis Jove himself the swelling tempest rears;
Death, present death, on every side appears.
Happy! thrice happy! who, in battle slain,
Press’d in Atrides’ cause the Trojan plain!
Oh! had I died before that well-fought wall!
Had some distinguish’d day renown’d my fall
(Such as was that when showers of javelins fled
From conquering Troy around Achilles dead),
All Greece had paid me solemn funerals then,
And spread my glory with the sons of men.
A shameful fate now hides my hapless head,
Unwept, unnoted, and for ever dead!”

A mighty wave rush’d o’er him as he spoke,
The raft is cover’d, and the mast is broke;
Swept from the deck and from the rudder torn,
Far on the swelling surge the chief was borne;
While by the howling tempest rent in twain
Flew sail and sail-yards rattling o’er the main.
Long-press’d, he heaved beneath the weighty wave,
Clogg’d by the cumbrous vest Calypso gave;
At length, emerging, from his nostrils wide
And gushing mouth effused the briny tide;
E’en then not mindless of his last retreat,
He seized the raft, and leap’d into his seat,
Strong with the fear of death. In rolling flood,
Now here, now there, impell’d the floating wood
As when a heap of gather’d thorns is cast,
Now to, now fro, before the autumnal blast;
Together clung, it rolls around the field;
So roll’d the float, and so its texture held:
And now the south, and now the north, bear sway,
And now the east the foamy floods obey,
And now the west wind whirls it o’er the sea.
The wandering chief with toils on toils oppress’d,
Leucothea saw, and pity touch’d her breast.
(Herself a mortal once, of Cadmus’ strain,
But now an azure sister of the main)
Swift as a sea-mew springing from the flood,
All radiant on the raft the goddess stood;
Then thus address’d him: “Thou whom heaven decrees
To Neptune’s wrath, stern tyrant of the seas!
(Unequal contest!) not his rage and power,
Great as he is, such virtue shall devour.
What I suggest, thy wisdom will perform:
Forsake thy float, and leave it to the storm;
Strip off thy garments; Neptune’s fury brave
With naked strength, and plunge into the wave.
To reach Phæacia all thy nerves extend,
There Fate decrees thy miseries shall end.
This heavenly scarf beneath thy bosom bind,
And live; give all thy terrors to the wind.
Soon as thy arms the happy shore shall gain,
Return the gift, and cast it in the main:
Observe my orders, and with heed obey,
Cast it far off, and turn thy eyes away.”

With that, her hand the sacred veil bestows,
Then down the deeps she dived from whence she rose;
A moment snatch’d the shining form away,
And all was covered with the curling sea.

Struck with amaze, yet still to doubt inclined,
He stands suspended, and explores his mind:
“What shall I do? unhappy me! who knows
But other gods intend me other woes?
Whoe’er thou art, I shall not blindly join
Thy pleaded reason, but consult with mine:
For scarce in ken appears that distant isle
Thy voice foretells me shall conclude my toil.
Thus then I judge: while yet the planks sustain
The wild waves’ fury, here I fix’d remain:
But, when their texture to the tempest yields,
I launch adventurous on the liquid fields,
Join to the help of gods the strength of man,
And take this method, since the best I can.”

While thus his thoughts an anxious council hold,
The raging god a watery mountain roll’d;
Like a black sheet the whelming billows spread,
Burst o’er the float, and thunder’d on his head.
Planks, beams, disparted fly; the scatter’d wood
Rolls diverse, and in fragments strews the flood.
So the rude Boreas, o’er the field new-shorn,
Tosses and drives the scatter’d heaps of corn.
And now a single beam the chief bestrides:
There poised a while above the bounding tides,
His limbs discumbers of the clinging vest,
And binds the sacred cincture round his breast:
Then prone an ocean in a moment flung,
Stretch’d wide his eager arms, and shot the seas along.
All naked now, on heaving billows laid,
Stern Neptune eyed him, and contemptuous said:

“Go, learn’d in woes, and other foes essay!
Go, wander helpless on the watery way;
Thus, thus find out the destined shore, and then
(If Jove ordains it) mix with happier men.
Whate’er thy fate, the ills our wrath could raise
Shall last remember’d in thy best of days.”

This said, his sea-green steeds divide the foam,
And reach high Ægæ and the towery dome.
Now, scarce withdrawn the fierce earth-shaking power,
Jove’s daughter Pallas watch’d the favouring hour.
Back to their caves she bade the winds to fly;
And hush’d the blustering brethren of the sky.
The drier blasts alone of Boreas away,
And bear him soft on broken waves away;
With gentle force impelling to that shore,
Where fate has destined he shall toil no more.
And now, two nights, and now two days were pass’d,
Since wide he wander’d on the watery waste;
Heaved on the surge with intermitting breath,
And hourly panting in the arms of death.
The third fair morn now blazed upon the main;
Then glassy smooth lay all the liquid plain;
The winds were hush’d, the billows scarcely curl’d,
And a dead silence still’d the watery world;
When lifted on a ridgy wave he spies
The land at distance, and with sharpen’d eyes.
As pious children joy with vast delight
When a loved sire revives before their sight
(Who, lingering long, has call’d on death in vain,
Fix’d by some demon to his bed of pain,
Till heaven by miracle his life restore);
So joys Ulysses at the appearing shore;
And sees (and labours onward as he sees)
The rising forests, and the tufted trees.
And now, as near approaching as the sound
Of human voice the listening ear may wound,
Amidst the rocks he heard a hollow roar
Of murmuring surges breaking on the shore;
Nor peaceful port was there, nor winding bay,
To shield the vessel from the rolling sea,
But cliffs and shaggy shores, a dreadful sight!
All rough with rocks, with foamy billows white.
Fear seized his slacken’d limbs and beating heart,
As thus he communed with his soul apart;

“Ah me! when, o’er a length of waters toss’d,
These eyes at last behold the unhoped-for coast,
No port receives me from the angry main,
But the loud deeps demand me back again.
Above, sharp rocks forbid access; around
Roar the wild waves; beneath, is sea profound!
No footing sure affords the faithless sand,
To stem too rapid, and too deep to stand.
If here I enter, my efforts are vain,
Dash’d on the cliffs, or heaved into the main;
Or round the island if my course I bend,
Where the ports open, or the shores descend,
Back to the seas the rolling surge may sweep,
And bury all my hopes beneath the deep.
Or some enormous whale the god may send
(For many such an Amphitrite attend);
Too well the turns of mortal chance I know,
And hate relentless of my heavenly foe.”
While thus he thought, a monstrous wave upbore
The chief, and dash’d him on the craggy shore;
Torn was his skin, nor had the ribs been whole,
But Instant Pallas enter’d in his soul.
Close to the cliff with both his hands he clung,
And stuck adherent, and suspended hung;
Till the huge surge roll’d off; then backward sweep
The refluent tides, and plunge him in the deep.
As when the polypus, from forth his cave
Torn with full force, reluctant beats the wave,
His ragged claws are stuck with stones and sands;
So the rough rock had shagg’d Ulysses hands,
And now had perish’d, whelm’d beneath the main,
The unhappy man; e’en fate had been in vain;
But all-subduing Pallas lent her power,
And prudence saved him in the needful hour.
Beyond the beating surge his course he bore,
(A wider circle, but in sight of shore),
With longing eyes, observing, to survey
Some smooth ascent, or safe sequester’d bay.
Between the parting rocks at length he spied
A failing stream with gentler waters glide;
Where to the seas the shelving shore declined,
And form’d a bay impervious to the wind.
To this calm port the glad Ulysses press’d,
And hail’d the river, and its god address’d:

“Whoe’er thou art, before whose stream unknown
I bend, a suppliant at thy watery throne,
Hear, azure king! nor let me fly in vain
To thee from Neptune and the raging main
Heaven hears and pities hapless men like me,
For sacred even to gods is misery:
Let then thy waters give the weary rest,
And save a suppliant, and a man distress’d.”

He pray’d, and straight the gentle stream subsides,
Detains the rushing current of his tides,
Before the wanderer smooths the watery way,
And soft receives him from the rolling sea.
That moment, fainting as he touch’d the shore,
He dropp’d his sinewy arms: his knees no more
Perform’d their office, or his weight upheld:
His swoln heart heaved; his bloated body swell’d:
From mouth and nose the briny torrent ran;
And lost in lassitude lay all the man,
Deprived of voice, of motion, and of breath;
The soul scarce waking in the arms of death.
Soon as warm life its wonted office found,
The mindful chief Leucothea’s scarf unbound;
Observant of her word, he turn’d aside
His head, and cast it on the rolling tide.
Behind him far, upon the purple waves,
The waters waft it, and the nymph receives.

Now parting from the stream, Ulysses found
A mossy bank with pliant rushes crown’d;
The bank he press’d, and gently kiss’d the ground;
Where on the flowery herb as soft he lay,
Thus to his soul the sage began to say:

“What will ye next ordain, ye powers on high!
And yet, ah yet, what fates are we to try?
Here by the stream, if I the night out-wear,
Thus spent already, how shall nature bear
The dews descending, and nocturnal air;
Or chilly vapours breathing from the flood
When morning rises?—If I take the wood,
And in thick shelter of innumerous boughs
Enjoy the comfort gentle sleep allows;
Though fenced from cold, and though my toil be pass’d,
What savage beasts may wander in the waste?
Perhaps I yet may fall a bloody prey
To prowling bears, or lions in the way.”

Thus long debating in himself he stood:
At length he took the passage to the wood,
Whose shady horrors on a rising brow
Waved high, and frown’d upon the stream below.
There grew two olives, closest of the grove,
With roots entwined, the branches interwove;
Alike their leaves, but not alike they smiled
With sister-fruits; one fertile, one was wild.
Nor here the sun’s meridian rays had power,
Nor wind sharp-piercing, nor the rushing shower;
The verdant arch so close its texture kept:
Beneath this covert great Ulysses crept.
Of gather’d leaves an ample bed he made
(Thick strewn by tempest through the bowery shade);
Where three at least might winter’s cold defy,
Though Boreas raged along the inclement sky.
This store with joy the patient hero found,
And, sunk amidst them, heap’d the leaves around.
As some poor peasant, fated to reside
Remote from neighbours in a forest wide,
Studious to save what human wants require,
In embers heap’d, preserves the seeds of fire:
Hid in dry foliage thus Ulysses lies,
Till Pallas pour’d soft slumbers on his eyes;
And golden dreams (the gift of sweet repose)
Lull’d all his cares, and banish’d all his woes.







While thus the weary wanderer sunk to rest,
And peaceful slumbers calmed his anxious breast,
The martial maid from heaven’s aërial height
Swift to Phæacia wing’d her rapid flight.
In elder times the soft Phæacian train
In ease possess’d the wide Hyperian plain;
Till the Cyclopean race in arms arose,
A lawless nation of gigantic foes;
Then great Nausithous from Hyperia far,
Through seas retreating from the sounds of war,
The recreant nation to fair Scheria led,
Where never science rear’d her laurell’d head;
There round his tribes a strength of wall he raised;
To heaven the glittering domes and temples blazed;
Just to his realms, he parted grounds from grounds,
And shared the lands, and gave the lands their bounds.
Now in the silent grave the monarch lay,
And wise Alcinous held the legal sway.

To his high palace through the fields of air
The goddess shot; Ulysses was her care.
There, as the night in silence roll’d away,
A heaven of charms divine Nausicaa lay:
Through the thick gloom the shining portals blaze;
Two nymphs the portals guard, each nymph a Grace,
Light as the viewless air the warrior maid
Glides through the valves, and hovers round her head;
A favourite virgin’s blooming form she took,
From Dymas sprung, and thus the vision spoke:

“Oh Indolent! to waste thy hours away!
And sleep’st thou careless of the bridal day!
Thy spousal ornament neglected lies;
Arise, prepare the bridal train, arise!
A just applause the cares of dress impart,
And give soft transport to a parent’s heart.
Haste, to the limpid stream direct thy way,
When the gay morn unveils her smiling ray;
Haste to the stream! companion of thy care,
Lo, I thy steps attend, thy labours share.
Virgin, awake! the marriage hour is nigh,
See from their thrones thy kindred monarchs sigh!
The royal car at early dawn obtain,
And order mules obedient to the rein;
For rough the way, and distant rolls the wave,
Where their fair vests Phæacian virgins lave,
In pomp ride forth; for pomp becomes the great
And majesty derives a grace from state.”
Then to the palaces of heaven she sails,
Incumbent on the wings of wafting gales;
The seat of gods; the regions mild of peace,
Full joy, and calm eternity of ease.
There no rude winds presume to shake the skies,
No rains descend, no snowy vapours rise;
But on immortal thrones the blest repose;
The firmament with living splendours glows.
Hither the goddess winged the aërial way,
Through heaven’s eternal gates that blazed with day.

Now from her rosy car Aurora shed
The dawn, and all the orient flamed with red.
Up rose the virgin with the morning light,
Obedient to the vision of the night.
The queen she sought, the queen her hours bestowed
In curious works; the whirling spindle glow’d
With crimson threads, while busy damsels call
The snowy fleece, or twist the purpled wool.
Meanwhile Phæacia’s peers in council sate;
From his high dome the king descends in state;
Then with a filial awe the royal maid
Approach’d him passing, and submissive said:

“Will my dread sire his ear regardful deign,
And may his child the royal car obtain?
Say, with my garments shall I bend my way?
Where through the vales the mazy waters stray?
A dignity of dress adorns the great,
And kings draw lustre from the robe of state.
Five sons thou hast; three wait the bridal day.
And spotless robes become the young and gay;
So when with praise amid the dance they shine,
By these my cares adorn’d that praise is mine.”

Thus she: but blushes ill-restrain’d betray
Her thoughts intentive on the bridal day,
The conscious sire the dawning blush survey’d,
And, smiling, thus bespoke the blooming maid
“My child, my darling joy, the car receive;
That, and whate’er our daughter asks, we give.”
Swift at the royal nod the attending train
The car prepare, the mules incessant rein,
The blooming virgin with despatchful cares
Tunics, and stoles, and robes imperial, bears.
The queen, assiduous to her train assigns
The sumptuous viands, and the flavorous wines.
The train prepare a cruse of curious mould,
A cruse of fragrance, form’d of burnish’d gold;
Odour divine! whose soft refreshing streams
Sleek the smooth skin, and scent the snowy limbs.

Now mounting the gay seat, the silken reins
Shine in her hand; along the sounding plains
Swift fly the mules; nor rode the nymph alone;
Around, a bevy of bright damsels shone.
They seek the cisterns where Phæacian dames
Wash their fair garments in the limpid streams;
Where, gathering into depth from falling rills,
The lucid wave a spacious bason fills.
The mules, unharness’d, range beside the main,
Or crop the verdant herbage of the plain.

Then emulous the royal robes they lave,
And plunge the vestures in the cleansing wave
(The vestures cleansed o’erspread the shelly sand,
Their snowy lustre whitens all the strand);
Then with a short repast relieve their toil,
And o’er their limbs diffuse ambrosial oil;
And while the robes imbibe the solar ray,
O’er the green mead the sporting virgins play
(Their shining veils unbound). Along the skies,
Toss’d and retoss’d, the ball incessant flies.
They sport, they feast; Nausicaa lifts her voice,
And, warbling sweet, makes earth and heaven rejoice.

As when o’er Erymanth Diana roves,
Or wide Täygetus’ resounding groves;
A sylvan train the huntress queen surrounds,
Her rattling quiver from her shoulders sounds:
Fierce in the sport, along the mountain’s brow
They bay the boar, or chase the bounding roe;
High o’er the lawn, with more majestic pace,
Above the nymphs she treads with stately grace;
Distinguish’d excellence the goddess proves;
Exults Latona as the virgin moves.
With equal grace Nausicaa trod the plain,
And shone transcendent o’er the beauteous train.

Meantime (the care and favourite of the skies
Wrapp’d in imbowering shade, Ulysses lies,
His woes forgot! but Pallas now address’d
To break the bands of all-composing rest.
Forth from her snowy hand Nausicaa threw
The various ball; the ball erroneous flew
And swam the stream; loud shrieks the virgin train,
And the loud shriek redoubles from the main.
Waked by the shrilling sound, Ulysses rose,
And, to the deaf woods wailing, breathed his woes:

“Ah me! on what inhospitable coast,
On what new region is Ulysses toss’d;
Possess’d by wild barbarians fierce in arms;
Or men, whose bosom tender pity warms?
What sounds are these that gather from he shores?
The voice of nymphs that haunt the sylvan bowers,
The fair-hair’d Dryads of the shady wood;
Or azure daughters of the silver flood;
Or human voice? but issuing from the shades,
Why cease I straight to learn what sound invades?”

Then, where the grove with leaves umbrageous bends,
With forceful strength a branch the hero rends;
Around his loins the verdant cincture spreads
A wreathy foliage and concealing shades.
As when a lion in the midnight hours,
Beat by rude blasts, and wet with wintry showers,
Descends terrific from the mountains brow;
With living flames his rolling eye balls glow;
With conscious strength elate, he bends his way,
Majestically fierce, to seize his prey
(The steer or stag;) or, with keen hunger bold,
Spring o’er the fence and dissipates the fold.
No less a terror, from the neighbouring groves
(Rough from the tossing surge) Ulysses moves;
Urged on by want, and recent from the storms;
The brackish ooze his manly grace deforms.
Wide o’er the shore with many a piercing cry
To rocks, to caves, the frightened virgins fly;
All but the nymph; the nymph stood fix’d alone,
By Pallas arm’d with boldness not her own.
Meantime in dubious thought the king awaits,
And, self-considering, as he stands, debates;
Distant his mournful story to declare,
Or prostrate at her knee address the prayer.
But fearful to offend, by wisdom sway’d,
At awful distance he accosts the maid:

“If from the skies a goddess, or if earth
(Imperial virgin) boast thy glorious birth,
To thee I bend! If in that bright disguise
Thou visit earth, a daughter of the skies,
Hail, Dian, hail! the huntress of the groves
So shines majestic, and so stately moves,
So breathes an air divine! But if thy race
Be mortal, and this earth thy native place,
Blest is the father from whose loins you sprung,
Blest is the mother at whose breast you hung.
Blest are the brethren who thy blood divide,
To such a miracle of charms allied:
Joyful they see applauding princes gaze,
When stately in the dance you swim the harmonious maze.
But blest o’er all, the youth with heavenly charms,
Who clasps the bright perfection in his arms!
Never, I never view’d till this blest hour
Such finish’d grace! I gaze, and I adore!
Thus seems the palm with stately honours crown’d
By Phœbus’ altars; thus o’erlooks the ground;
The pride of Delos. (By the Delian coast,
I voyaged, leader of a warrior-host,
But ah, how changed! from thence my sorrow flows;
O fatal voyage, source of all my woes;)
Raptured I stood, and as this hour amazed,
With reverence at the lofty wonder gazed:
Raptured I stand! for earth ne’er knew to bear
A plant so stately, or a nymph so fair.
Awed from access, I lift my suppliant hands;
For Misery, O queen! before thee stands.
Twice ten tempestuous nights I roll’d, resign’d
To roaring billows, and the warring wind;
Heaven bade the deep to spare; but heaven, my foe,
Spares only to inflict some mightier woe.
Inured to cares, to death in all its forms;
Outcast I rove, familiar with the storms.
Once more I view the face of human kind:
Oh let soft pity touch thy generous mind!
Unconscious of what air I breathe, I stand
Naked, defenceless on a narrow land.
Propitious to my wants a vest supply
To guard the wretched from the inclement sky:
So may the gods, who heaven and earth control,
Crown the chaste wishes of thy virtuous soul,
On thy soft hours their choicest blessings shed;
Blest with a husband be thy bridal bed;
Blest be thy husband with a blooming race,
And lasting union crown your blissful days.
The gods, when they supremely bless, bestow
Firm union on their favourites below;
Then envy grieves, with inly-pining hate;
The good exult, and heaven is in our state.”

To whom the nymph: “O stranger, cease thy care;
Wise is thy soul, but man is born to bear;
Jove weighs affairs of earth in dubious scales,
And the good suffers, while the bad prevails.
Bear, with a soul resign’d, the will of Jove;
Who breathes, must mourn: thy woes are from above.
But since thou tread’st our hospitable shore,
’Tis mine to bid the wretched grieve no more,
To clothe the naked, and thy way to guide.
Know, the Phæacian tribes this land divide;
From great Alcinous’ royal loins I spring,
A happy nation, and a happy king.”

Then to her maids: “Why, why, ye coward train,
These fears, this flight? ye fear, and fly in vain.
Dread ye a foe? dismiss that idle dread,
’Tis death with hostile step these shores to tread;
Safe in the love of heaven, an ocean flows
Around our realm, a barrier from the foes;
’Tis ours this son of sorrow to relieve,
Cheer the sad heart, nor let affliction grieve.
By Jove the stranger and the poor are sent;
And what to those we give to Jove is lent.
Then food supply, and bathe his fainting limbs
Where waving shades obscure the mazy streams.”

Obedient to the call, the chief they guide
To the calm current of the secret tide;
Close by the stream a royal dress they lay,
A vest and robe, with rich embroidery gay;
Then unguents in a vase of gold supply,
That breathed a fragrance through the balmy sky.

To them the king: “No longer I detain
Your friendly care: retire, ye virgin train!
Retire, while from my wearied limbs I lave
The foul pollution of the briny wave.
Ye gods! since this worn frame refection knew,
What scenes have I surveyed of dreadful view!
But, nymphs, recede! sage chastity denies
To raise the blush, or pain the modest eyes.”

The nymphs withdrawn, at once into the tide
Active he bounds; the flashing waves divide
O’er all his limbs his hands the waves diffuse,
And from his locks compress the weedy ooze;
The balmy oil, a fragrant shower, be sheds;
Then, dressed, in pomp magnificently treads.
The warrior-goddess gives his frame to shine
With majesty enlarged, and air divine:
Back from his brows a length of hair unfurls,
His hyacinthine locks descend in wavy curls.
As by some artist, to whom Vulcan gives
His skill divine, a breathing statue lives;
By Pallas taught, he frames the wondrous mould,
And o’er the silver pours the fusile gold
So Pallas his heroic frame improves
With heavenly bloom, and like a god he moves.
A fragrance breathes around; majestic grace
Attends his steps: the astonished virgins gaze.
Soft he reclines along the murmuring seas,
Inhaling freshness from the fanning breeze.

The wondering nymph his glorious port survey’d,
And to her damsels, with amazement, said:

“Not without care divine the stranger treads
This land of joy; his steps some godhead leads:
Would Jove destroy him, sure he had been driven
Far from this realm, the favourite isle of heaven.
Late, a sad spectacle of woe, he trod
The desert sands, and now he looks a god.
Oh heaven! in my connubial hour decree
This man my spouse, or such a spouse as he!
But haste, the viands and the bowl provide.”
The maids the viands and the bowl supplied:
Eager he fed, for keen his hunger raged,
And with the generous vintage thirst assuaged.

Now on return her care Nausicaa bends,
The robes resumes, the glittering car ascends,
Far blooming o’er the field; and as she press’d
The splendid seat, the listening chief address’d:

“Stranger, arise! the sun rolls down the day.
Lo, to the palace I direct thy way;
Where, in high state, the nobles of the land
Attend my royal sire, a radiant band
But hear, though wisdom in thy soul presides,
Speaks from thy tongue, and every action guides;
Advance at distance, while I pass the plain
Where o’er the furrows waves the golden grain;
Alone I reascend—With airy mounds
A strength of wall the guarded city bounds;
The jutting land two ample bays divides:
Full through the narrow mouths descend the tides;
The spacious basons arching rocks enclose,
A sure defence from every storm that blows.
Close to the bay great Neptune’s fane adjoins;
And near, a forum flank’d with marble shines,
Where the bold youth, the numerous fleets to store,
Shape the broad sail, or smooth the taper oar:
For not the bow they bend, nor boast the skill
To give the feather’d arrow wings to kill;
But the tall mast above the vessel rear,
Or teach the fluttering sail to float in air.
They rush into the deep with eager joy,
Climb the steep surge, and through the tempest fly;
A proud, unpolish’d race—To me belongs
The care to shun the blast of slanderous tongues;
Lest malice, prone the virtuous to defame,
Thus with wild censure taint my spotless name:
‘What stranger this whom thus Nausicaa leads!
Heavens, with what graceful majesty he treads!
Perhaps a native of some distant shore,
The future consort of her bridal hour:
Or rather some descendant of the skies;
Won by her prayer, the aërial bridegroom flies,
Heaven on that hour its choicest influence shed,
That gave a foreign spouse to crown her bed!
All, all the godlike worthies that adorn
This realm, she flies: Phæacia is her scorn.’
And just the blame: for female innocence
Not only flies the guilt, but shuns the offence:
The unguarded virgin, as unchaste, I blame;
And the least freedom with the sex is shame,
Till our consenting sires a spouse provide,
And public nuptials justify the bride,
But would’st thou soon review thy native plain?
Attend, and speedy thou shalt pass the main:
Nigh where a grove with verdant poplars crown’d,
To Pallas sacred, shades the holy ground,
We bend our way; a bubbling fount distills
A lucid lake, and thence descends in rills;
Around the grove, a mead with lively green
Falls by degrees, and forms a beauteous scene;
Here a rich juice the royal vineyard pours;
And there the garden yields a waste of flowers.
Hence lies the town, as far as to the ear
Floats a strong shout along the waves of air.
There wait embower’d, while I ascend alone
To great Alcinous on his royal throne.
Arrived, advance, impatient of delay,
And to the lofty palace bend thy way:
The lofty palace overlooks the town,
From every dome by pomp superior known;
A child may point the way. With earnest gait
Seek thou the queen along the rooms of state;
Her royal hand a wondrous work designs,
Around a circle of bright damsels shines;
Part twist the threads, and part the wool dispose,
While with the purple orb the spindle glows.
High on a throne, amid the Scherian powers,
My royal father shares the genial hours:
But to the queen thy mournful tale disclose,
With the prevailing eloquence of woes:
So shalt thou view with joy thy natal shore,
Though mountains rise between and oceans roar.”

She added not, but waving, as she wheel’d,
The silver scourge, it glitter’d o’er the field;
With skill the virgin guides the embroider’d rein,
Slow rolls the car before the attending train,
Now whirling down the heavens, the golden day
Shot through the western clouds a dewy ray;
The grove they reach, where, from the sacred shade,
To Pallas thus the pensive hero pray’d:

“Daughter of Jove! whose arms in thunder wield
The avenging bolt, and shake the dreadful shield;
Forsook by thee, in vain I sought thy aid
When booming billows closed above my bead;
Attend, unconquer’d maid! accord my vows,
Bid the Great hear, and pitying, heal my woes.”

This heard Minerva, but forbore to fly
(By Neptune awed) apparent from the sky;
Stern god! who raged with vengeance, unrestrain’d.
Till great Ulysses hail’d his native land.







The patient heavenly man thus suppliant pray’d;
While the slow mules draws on the imperial maid;
Through the proud street she moves, the public gaze;
The turning wheel before the palace stays.
With ready love her brothers, gathering round,
Received the vestures, and the mules unbound.
She seeks the bridal bower: a matron there
The rising fire supplies with busy care,
Whose charms in youth her father’s heart inflamed,
Now worn with age, Eurymedusa named;
The captive dame Phæacian rovers bore,
Snatch’d from Epirus, her sweet native shore
(A grateful prize), and in her bloom bestow’d
On good Alcinous, honor’d as a god;
Nurse of Nausicaa from her infant years,
And tender second to a mother’s cares.

Now from the sacred thicket where he lay,
To town Ulysses took the winding way.
Propitious Pallas, to secure her care,
Around him spread a veil of thicken’d air;
To shun the encounter of the vulgar crowd,
Insulting still, inquisitive and loud.
When near the famed Phæacian walls he drew,
The beauteous city opening to his view,
His step a virgin met, and stood before:
A polish’d urn the seeming virgin bore,
And youthful smiled; but in the low disguise
Lay hid the goddess with the azure eyes.

“Show me, fair daughter (thus the chief demands),
The house of him who rules these happy lands
Through many woes and wanderings, do I come
To good Alcinous’ hospitable dome.
Far from my native coast, I rove alone,
A wretched stranger, and of all unknown!”

The goddess answer’d: “Father, I obey,
And point the wandering traveller his way:
Well known to me the palace you inquire,
For fast beside it dwells my honour’d sire:
But silent march, nor greet the common train
With question needless, or inquiry vain;
A race of ragged mariners are these,
Unpolish’d men, and boisterous as their seas
The native islanders alone their care,
And hateful he who breathes a foreign air.
These did the ruler of the deep ordain
To build proud navies, and command the main;
On canvas wings to cut the watery way;
No bird so light, no thought so swift as they.”

Thus having spoke, the unknown celestial leads:
The footsteps of the deity he treads,
And secret moves along the crowded space,
Unseen of all the rude Phæacian race.
(So Pallas order’d, Pallas to their eyes
The mist objected, and condensed the skies.)
The chief with wonder sees the extended streets,
The spreading harbours, and the riding fleets;
He next their princes’ lofty domes admires,
In separate islands, crown’d with rising spires;
And deep entrenchments, and high walls of stone.
That gird the city like a marble zone.
At length the kingly palace-gates he view’d;
There stopp’d the goddess, and her speech renew’d;

“My task is done: the mansion you inquire
Appears before you: enter, and admire.
High-throned, and feasting, there thou shalt behold
The sceptred rulers. Fear not, but be bold:
A decent boldness ever meets with friends,
Succeeds, and even a stranger recommends
First to the queen prefer a suppliant’s claim,
Alcinous’ queen, Arete is her name.
The same her parents, and her power the same.
For know, from ocean’s god Nausithous sprung,
And Peribæa, beautiful and young
(Eurymedon’s last hope, who ruled of old
The race of giants, impious, proud, and bold:
Perish’d the nation in unrighteous war,
Perish’d the prince, and left this only heir),
Who now, by Neptune’s amorous power compress’d,
Produced a monarch that his people bless’d,
Father and prince of the Phæacian name;
From him Rhexenor and Alcinous came.
The first by Phœbus’ hurtling arrows fired,
New from his nuptials, hapless youth! expired.
No son survived; Arete heir’d his state,
And her, Alcinous chose his royal mate.
With honours yet to womankind unknown.
This queen he graces, and divides the throne;
In equal tenderness her sons conspire,
And all the children emulate their sire.
When through the streets she gracious deigns to move
(The public wonder and the public love),
The tongues of all with transport sound her praise,
The eyes of all, as on a goddess, gaze.
She feels the triumph of a generous breast;
To heal divisions, to relieve the oppress’d;
In virtue rich; in blessing others, bless’d.
(to then secure, thy humble suit prefer
And owe thy country and thy friends to her.”

With that the goddess deign’d no longer stay,
But o’er the world of waters wing’d her way;
Forsaking Scheria’s ever-pleasing shore,
The winds to Marathon the virgin bore:
Thence, where proud Athens rears her towery head,
With opening streets and shining structures spread,
She pass’d, delighted with the well-known seats;
And to Erectheus’ sacred dome retreats.

Meanwhile Ulysses at the palace waits,
There stops, and anxious with his soul debates,
Fix’d in amaze before the royal gates.
The front appear’d with radiant splendours gay,
Bright as the lamp of night, or orb of day,
The walls were massy brass: the cornice high
Blue metals crown’d in colours of the sky,
Rich plates of gold the folding doors incase;
The pillars silver, on a brazen base;
Silver the lintels deep-projecting o’er,
And gold the ringlets that command the door.
Two rows of stately dogs, on either hand,
In sculptured gold and labour’d silver stood
These Vulcan form’d with art divine, to wait
Immortal guardians at Alcinous’ gate;
Alive each animated frame appears,
And still to live beyond the power of years,
Fair thrones within from space to space were raised,
Where various carpets with embroidery blessed,
The work of matrons: these the princes press’d,
Day following day, a long-continued feast.
Refulgent pedestals the walls surround,
Which boys of gold with flaming torches crown’d;
The polish’d ore, reflecting every ray,
Blazed on the banquets with a double day.
Full fifty handmaids form the household train;
Some turn the mill, or sift the golden grain;
Some ply the loom; their busy fingers move
Like poplar-leaves when Zephyr fans the grove.
Not more renown’d the men of Scheria’s isle
For sailing arts and all the naval toil,
Than works of female skill their women’s pride,
The flying shuttle through the threads to guide:
Pallas to these her double gifts imparts,
Incentive genius, and industrious arts.

Close to the gates a spacious garden lies,
From storms defended and inclement skies.
Four acres was the allotted space of ground,
Fenced with a green enclosure all around.
Tall thriving trees confess’d the fruitful mould:
The reddening apple ripens here to gold.
Here the blue fig with luscious juice o’erflows,
With deeper red the full pomegranate glows;
The branch here bends beneath the weighty pear,
And verdant olives flourish round the year,
The balmy spirit of the western gale
Eternal breathes on fruits, unthought to fail:
Each dropping pear a following pear supplies,
On apples apples, figs on figs arise:
The same mild season gives the blooms to blow,
The buds to harden, and the fruits to grow.

Here order’d vines in equal ranks appear,
With all the united labours of the year;
Some to unload the fertile branches run,
Some dry the blackening clusters in the sun,
Others to tread the liquid harvest join:
The groaning presses foam with floods of wine
Here are the vines in early flower descried,
Here grapes discolour’d on the sunnyside,
And there in autumn’s richest purple dyed,

Beds of all various herbs, for ever green,
In beauteous order terminate the scene.

Two plenteous fountains the whole prospect crown’d
This through the gardens leads its streams around
Visits each plant, and waters all the ground;
While that in pipes beneath the palace flows,
And thence its current on the town bestows:
To various use their various streams they bring,
The people one, and one supplies the king.

Such were the glories which the gods ordain’d,
To grace Alcinous, and his happy land.
E’en from the chief whom men and nations knew,
The unwonted scene surprise and rapture drew;
In pleasing thought he ran the prospect o’er,
Then hasty enter’d at the lofty door.
Night now approaching, in the palace stand,
With goblets crown’d, the rulers of the land;
Prepared for rest, and offering to the god
Who bears the virtue of the sleepy rod,
Unseen he glided through the joyous crowd,
With darkness circled, and an ambient cloud.
Direct to great Alcinous’ throne he came,
And prostrate fell before the imperial dame.
Then from around him dropp’d the veil of night;
Sudden he shines, and manifest to sight.
The nobles gaze, with awful fear oppress’d;
Silent they gaze, and eye the godlike guest.

“Daughter of great Rhexenor! (thus began,
Low at her knees, the much-enduring man)
To thee, thy consort, and this royal train,
To all that share the blessings of your reign,
A suppliant bends: oh pity human woe!
’Tis what the happy to the unhappy owe.
A wretched exile to his country send,
Long worn with griefs, and long without a friend
So may the gods your better days increase,
And all your joys descend on all your race;
So reign for ever on your country’s breast,
Your people blessing, by your people bless’d!”

Then to the genial hearth he bow’d his face,
And humbled in the ashes took his place.
Silence ensued. The eldest first began,
Echeneus sage, a venerable man!
Whose well-taught mind the present age surpass’d,
And join’d to that the experience of the last.
Fit words attended on his weighty sense,
And mild persuasion flow’d in eloquence.

“Oh sight (he cried) dishonest and unjust!
A guest, a stranger, seated in the dust!
To raise the lowly suppliant from the ground
Befits a monarch. Lo! the peers around
But wait thy word, the gentle guest to grace,
And seat him fair in some distinguish’d place.
Let first the herald due libation pay
To Jove, who guides the wanderer on his way:
Then set the genial banquet in his view,
And give the stranger-guest a stranger’s due.”

His sage advice the listening king obeys,
He stretch’d his hand the prudent chief to raise,
And from his seat Laodamas removed
(The monarch’s offspring, and his best-beloved);
There next his side the godlike hero sate;
With stars of silver shone the bed of state.
The golden ewer a beauteous handmaid brings,
Replenish’d from the cool translucent springs,
Whose polish’d vase with copious streams supplies
A silver layer of capacious size.
The table next in regal order spread,
The glittering canisters are heap’d with bread:
Viands of various kinds invite the taste,
Of choicest sort and savour, rich repast!
Thus feasting high, Alcinous gave the sign,
And bade the herald pour the rosy wine;
“Let all around the due libation pay
To Jove, who guides the wanderer on his way.”

He said. Pontonous heard the king’s command;
The circling goblet moves from hand to hand;
Each drinks the juice that glads the heart of man.
Alcinous then, with aspect mild, began:

“Princes and peers, attend; while we impart
To you the thoughts of no inhuman heart.
Now pleased and satiate from the social rite
Repair we to the blessings of the night;
But with the rising day, assembled here,
Let all the elders of the land appear,
Pious observe our hospitable laws,
And Heaven propitiate in the stranger’s cause;
Then join’d in council, proper means explore
Safe to transport him to the wished-for shore
(How distant that, imports us not to know,
Nor weigh the labour, but relieve the woe).
Meantime, nor harm nor anguish let him bear
This interval, Heaven trusts him to our care
But to his native land our charge resign’d,
Heaven’s is his life to come, and all the woes behind.
Then must he suffer what the Fates ordain;
For Fate has wove the thread of life with pain!
And twins, e’en from the birth, are Misery and Man!
But if, descended from the Olympian bower,
Gracious approach us some immortal power;
If in that form thou comest a guest divine:
Some high event the conscious gods design.
As yet, unbid they never graced our feast,
The solemn sacrifice call’d down the guest;
Then manifest of Heaven the vision stood,
And to our eyes familiar was the god.
Oft with some favour’d traveller they stray,
And shine before him all the desert way;
With social intercourse, and face to face,
The friends and guardians of our pious race.
So near approach we their celestial kind,
By justice, truth, and probity of mind;
As our dire neighbours of Cyclopean birth
Match in fierce wrong the giant-sons of earth.”

“Let no such thought (with modest grace rejoin’d
The prudent Greek) possess the royal mind.
Alas! a mortal, like thyself, am I;
No glorious native of yon azure sky:
In form, ah how unlike their heavenly kind!
How more inferior in the gifts of mind!
Alas, a mortal! most oppress’d of those
Whom Fate has loaded with a weight of woes;
By a sad train of Miseries alone
Distinguish’d long, and second now to none!
By Heaven’s high will compell’d from shore to shore;
With Heaven’s high will prepared to suffer more.
What histories of toil could I declare!
But still long-wearied nature wants repair;
Spent with fatigue, and shrunk with pining fast,
My craving bowels still require repast.
Howe’er the noble, suffering mind may grieve
Its load of anguish, and disdain to live,
Necessity demands our daily bread;
Hunger is insolent, and will be fed.
But finish, oh ye peers! what you propose,
And let the morrow’s dawn conclude my woes.
Pleased will I suffer all the gods ordain,
To see my soil, my son, my friends again.
That view vouchsafed, let instant death surprise
With ever-during shade these happy eyes!”

The assembled peers with general praise approved
His pleaded reason, and the suit he moved.
Each drinks a full oblivion of his cares,
And to the gifts of balmy sleep repairs,
Ulysses in the regal walls alone
Remain’d: beside him, on a splendid throne,
Divine Arete and Alcinous shone.
The queen, on nearer view, the guest survey’d,
Rob’d in the garments her own hands had made,
Not without wonder seen. Then thus began,
Her words addressing to the godlike man:

“Camest thou hither, wondrous stranger! say,
From lands remote and o’er a length of sea?
Tell, then, whence art thou? whence, that princely air?
And robes like these, so recent and so fair?”

“Hard is the task, O princess! you impose
(Thus sighing spoke the man of many woes),
The long, the mournful series to relate
Of all my sorrows sent by Heaven and Fate!
Yet what you ask, attend. An island lies
Beyond these tracts, and under other skies,
Ogygia named, in Ocean’s watery arms;
Where dwells Calypso, dreadful in her charms!
Remote from gods or men she holds her reign,
Amid the terrors of a rolling main.
Me, only me, the hand of fortune bore,
Unblest! to tread that interdicted shore:
When Jove tremendous in the sable deeps
Launch’d his red lightning at our scattered ships;
Then, all my fleet and all my followers lost.
Sole on a plank on boiling surges toss’d,
Heaven drove my wreck the Ogygian Isle to find,
Full nine days floating to the wave and wind.
Met by the goddess there with open arms,
She bribed my stay with more than human charms;
Nay, promised, vainly promised, to bestow
Immortal life, exempt from age and woe;
But all her blandishments successless prove,
To banish from my breast my country’s love.
I stay reluctant seven continued years,
And water her ambrosial couch with tears,
The eighth she voluntary moves to part,
Or urged by Jove, or her own changeful heart.
A raft was formed to cross the surging sea;
Herself supplied the stores and rich array,
And gave the gales to waft me on my way,
In seventeen days appear’d your pleasing coast,
And woody mountains half in vapours lost.
Joy touched my soul; my soul was joy’d in vain,
For angry Neptune roused the raging main;
The wild winds whistle, and the billows roar;
The splitting raft the furious tempest tore;
And storms vindictive intercept the shore.
Soon as their rage subsides, the seas I brave
With naked force, and shoot along the wave,
To reach this isle; but there my hopes were lost,
The surge impell’d me on a craggy coast.
I chose the safer sea, and chanced to find
A river’s mouth impervious to the wind,
And clear of rocks. I fainted by the flood;
Then took the shelter of the neighbouring wood.
’Twas night, and, covered in the foliage deep,
Jove plunged my senses in the death of sleep.
All night I slept, oblivious of my pain:
Aurora dawned and Phœbus shined in vain,
Nor, till oblique he sloped his evening ray,
Had Somnus dried the balmy dews away.
Then female voices from the shore I heard:
A maid amidst them, goddess-like appear’d;
To her I sued, she pitied my distress;
Like thee in beauty, nor in virtue less.
Who from such youth could hope considerate care?
In youth and beauty wisdom is but rare!
She gave me life, relieved with just supplies
My wants, and lent these robes that strike your eyes.
This is the truth: and oh, ye powers on high!
Forbid that want should sink me to a lie.”

To this the king: “Our daughter but express’d
Her cares imperfect to our godlike guest.
Suppliant to her, since first he chose to pray,
Why not herself did she conduct the way,
And with her handmaids to our court convey?”

“Hero and king (Ulysses thus replied)
Nor blame her faultless nor suspect of pride:
She bade me follow in the attendant train;
But fear and reverence did my steps detain,
Lest rash suspicion might alarm thy mind:
Man’s of a jealous and mistaken kind.”

“Far from my soul (he cried) the gods efface
All wrath ill-grounded, and suspicion base!
Whate’er is honest, stranger, I approve,
And would to Phœbus, Pallas, and to Jove,
Such as thou art, thy thought and mine were one,
Nor thou unwilling to be called my son.
In such alliance couldst thou wish to join,
A palace stored with treasures should be thine.
But if reluctant, who shall force thy stay?
Jove bids to set the stranger on his way,
And ships shall wait thee with the morning ray.
Till then, let slumber cross thy careful eyes:
The wakeful mariners shall watch the skies,
And seize the moment when the breezes rise:
Then gently waft thee to the pleasing shore,
Where thy soul rests, and labour is no more.
Far as Euboea though thy country lay,
Our ships with ease transport thee in a day.
Thither of old, earth’s giant son to view,
On wings of wind with Rhadamanth they flew;
This land, from whence their morning course begun,
Saw them returning with the setting sun.
Your eyes shall witness and confirm my tale,
Our youth how dexterous, and how fleet our sail,
When justly timed with equal sweep they row,
And ocean whitens in long tracks below.”

Thus he. No word the experienced man replies,
But thus to heaven (and heavenward lifts his eyes):
“O Jove! O father! what the king accords
Do thou make perfect! sacred be his words!
Wide o’er the world Alcinous’ glory shine!
Let fame be his, and ah! my country mine!”

Meantime Arete, for the hour of rest,
Ordains the fleecy couch, and covering vest;
Bids her fair train the purple quilts prepare,
And the thick carpets spread with busy care.
With torches blazing in their hands they pass’d,
And finish’d all their queen’s command with haste:
Then gave the signal to the willing guest:
He rose with pleasure, and retired to rest.
There, soft extended, to the murmuring sound
Of the high porch, Ulysses sleeps profound!
Within, released from cares, Alcinous lies;
And fast beside were closed Arete’s eyes.




BOOK VIII.


Alcinous calls a council, in which it is resolved to transport Ulysses
into his country. After which splendid entertainments are made, where
the celebrated musician and poet, Demodocus, plays and sings to the
guests. They next proceed to the games, the race, the wrestling,
discus, &c., where Ulysses casts a prodigious length, to the admiration
of all the spectators. They return again to the banquet and Demodocus
sings the loves of Mars and Venus. Ulysses, after a compliment to the
poet, desires him to sing the introduction of the wooden horse into
Troy, which subject provoking his tears, Alcinous inquires of his guest
his name, parentage, and fortunes.


Now fair Aurora lifts her golden ray,
And all the ruddy orient flames with day:
Alcinous, and the chief, with dawning light,
Rose instant from the slumbers of the night;
Then to the council-seat they bend their way,
And fill the shining thrones along the bay.

Meanwhile Minerva, in her guardian care,
Shoots from the starry vault through fields of air;
In form, a herald of the king, she flies
From peer to peer, and thus incessant cries;

“Nobles and chiefs who rule Phæacia’s states,
The king in council your attendance waits;
A prince of grace divine your aid implores,
O’er unknown seas arrived from unknown shores.”

She spoke, and sudden with tumultuous sounds
Of thronging multitudes the shore rebounds:
At once the seats they fill; and every eye
Glazed, as before some brother of the sky.
Pallas with grace divine his form improves,
More high he treads, and more enlarged he moves:
She sheds celestial bloom, regard to draw;
And gives a dignity of mien, to awe;
With strength, the future prize of fame to play,
And gather all the honours of the day.

Then from his glittering throne Alcinous rose;
“Attend (he cried) while we our will disclose.
Your present aid this godlike stranger craves,
Toss’d by rude tempest through a war of waves;
Perhaps from realms that view the rising day,
Or nations subject to the western ray.
Then grant, what here all sons of woe obtain
(For here affliction never pleads in vain);
Be chosen youth prepared, expert to try
The vast profound and bid the vessel fly;
Launch the tall back, and order every oar;
Then in our court indulge the genial hour.
Instant, you sailors to this task attend;
Swift to the palace, all ye peers ascend;
Let none to strangers honours due disclaim:
Be there Demodocus the bard of fame,
Taught by the gods to please, when high he sings
The vocal lay, responsive to the strings.”

Thus spoke the prince; the attending peers obey;
In state they move; Alcinous heads the way
Swift to Demodocus the herald flies,
At once the sailors to their charge arise;
They launch the vessel, and unfurl the sails,
And stretch the swelling canvas to the gales;
Then to the palace move: a gathering throng,
Youth, and white age, tumultuous pour along.
Now all accesses to the dome are fill’d;
Eight boars, the choicest of the herd, are kill’d;
Two beeves, twelve fatlings, from the flock they bring
To crown the feast; so wills the bounteous king.
The herald now arrives, and guides along
The sacred master of celestial song;
Dear to the Muse! who gave his days to flow
With mighty blessings, mix’d with mighty woe;
With clouds of darkness quench’d his visual ray,
But gave him skill to raise the lofty lay.
High on a radiant throne sublime in state,
Encircled by huge multitudes, he sate;
With silver shone the throne; his lyre, well strung
To rapturous sounds, at hand Poutonous hung.
Before his seat a polish’d table shines,
And a full goblet foams with generous wines;
His food a herald bore; and now they fed;
And now the rage of craving hunger fled.

Then, fired by all the Muse, aloud he sings
The mighty deeds of demigods and kings;
From that fierce wrath the noble song arose,
That made Ulysses and Achilles foes;
How o’er the feast they doom the fall of Troy;
The stern debate Atrides hears with joy;
For Heaven foretold the contest, when he trod
The marble threshold of the Delphic god,
Curious to learn the counsels of the sky,
Ere yet he loosed the rage of war on Troy.

Touch’d at the song, Ulysses straight resign’d
To soft affliction all his manly mind.
Before his eyes the purple vest he drew,
Industrious to conceal the falling dew;
But when the music paused, he ceased to shed
The flowing tear, and raised his drooping head;
And, lifting to the gods a goblet crown’d,
He pour’d a pure libation to the ground.

Transported with the song, the listening train
Again with loud applause demand the strain;
Again Ulysses veil’d his pensive head.
Again unmann’d, a shower of sorrows shed;
Conceal’d he wept; the king observed alone
The silent tear, and heard the secret groan;
Then to the bard aloud—“O cease to sing,
Dumb be thy voice and mute the harmonious string;
Enough the feast has pleased, enough the power
Of heavenly song has crown’d the genial hour!
Incessant in the games your strength display,
Contest, ye brave the honours of the day!
That pleased the admiring stranger may proclaim
In distant regions the Phæacian fame:
None wield the gauntlet with so dire a sway,
Or swifter in the race devour the way;
None in the leap spring with so strong a bound,
Or firmer, in the wrestling, press the ground.”

Thus spoke the king; the attending peers obey;
In state they move, Alcinous lends the way;
His golden lyre Demodocus unstrung,
High on a column in the palace hung;
And guided by a herald’s guardian cares,
Majestic to the lists of Fame repairs.

Now swarms the populace: a countless throng,
Youth and hoar age; and man drives man along.
The games begin; ambitious of the prize,
Acroneus, Thoon, and Eretmeus rise;
The prize Ocyalus and Prymneus claim,
Anchialus and Ponteus, chiefs of fame.
There Proreus, Nautes, Eratreus, appear
And famed Amphialus, Polyneus’ heir;
Euryalus, like Mars terrific, rose,
When clad in wrath he withers hosts of foes;
Naubolides with grace unequall’d shone,
Or equall’d by Laodamas alone.
With these came forth Ambasineus the strong:
And three brave sons, from great Alcinous sprung.

Ranged in a line the ready racers stand,
Start from the goal, and vanish o’er the strand:
Swift as on wings of winds, upborne they fly,
And drifts of rising dust involve the sky.
Before the rest, what space the hinds allow
Between the mule and ox, from plough to plough,
Clytonius sprung: he wing’d the rapid way,
And bore the unrivall’d honours of the day.
With fierce embrace the brawny wrestlers join;
The conquest, great Euryalus, is thine.
Amphialus sprung forward with a bound,
Superior in the leap, a length of ground.
From Elatreus’ strong arm the discus flies,
And sings with unmatch’d force along the skies.
And Laodam whirls high, with dreadful sway,
The gloves of death, victorious in the fray.

While thus the peerage in the games contends,
In act to speak, Laodamas ascends.

“O friends (he cries), the stranger seems well skill’d
To try the illustrious labours of the field:
I deem him brave: then grant the brave man’s claim,
Invite the hero to his share of fame.
What nervous arms he boasts! how firm his tread!
His limbs how turn’d! how broad his shoulders spread!
By age unbroke!—but all-consuming care
Destroys perhaps the strength that time would spare:
Dire is the ocean, dread in all its forms!
Man must decay when man contends with storms.”

“Well hast thou spoke (Euryalus replies):
Thine is the guest, invite him thou to rise.”
Swift as the word, advancing from the crowd,
He made obeisance, and thus spoke aloud:

“Vouchsafes the reverend stranger to display
His manly worth, and share the glorious day?
Father, arise! for thee thy port proclaims
Expert to conquer in the solemn games.
To fame arise! for what more fame can yield
Than the swift race, or conflict of the field?
Steal from corroding care one transient day,
To glory give the space thou hast to stay;
Short is the time, and lo! e’en now the gales
Call thee aboard, and stretch the swelling sails.”

To whom with sighs Ulysses gave reply:
“Ah why the ill-suiting pastime must I try?
To gloomy care my thoughts alone are free;
Ill the gay sports with troubled hearts agree;
Sad from my natal hour my days have ran,
A much-afflicted, much-enduring man!
Who, suppliant to the king and peers, implores
A speedy voyage to his native shore.”

“Wide wanders, Laodam, thy erring tongue
The sports of glory to the brave belong
(Retorts Euryalus): he bears no claim
Among the great, unlike the sons of Fame.
A wandering merchant he frequents the main
Some mean seafarer in pursuit of gain;
Studious of freight, in naval trade well skill’d,
But dreads the athletic labours of the field.”

Incensed, Ulysses with a frown replies:
“O forward to proclaim thy soul unwise!
With partial hands the gods their gifts dispense;
Some greatly think, some speak with manly sense;
Here Heaven an elegance of form denies,
But wisdom the defect of form supplies;
This man with energy of thought controls,
And steals with modest violence our souls;
He speaks reservedly, but he speaks with force,
Nor can one word be changed but for a worse;
In public more than mortal he appears,
And as he moves, the praising crowd reveres;
While others, beauteous as the etherial kind,
The nobler portion went, a knowing mind,
In outward show Heaven gives thee to excel.
But Heaven denies the praise of thinking well
I’ll bear the brave a rude ungovern’d tongue,
And, youth, my generous soul resents the wrong.
Skill’d in heroic exercise, I claim
A post of honour with the sons of Fame.
Such was my boast while vigour crown’d my days,
Now care surrounds me, and my force decays;
Inured a melancholy part to bear
In scenes of death, by tempest and by war
Yet thus by woes impair’d, no more I waive
To prove the hero—slander stings the brave.”

Then gliding forward with a furious bound
He wrench’d a rocky fragment from the ground
By far more ponderous, and more huge by far
Than what Phæacia’s sons discharged in air.
Fierce from his arm the enormous load he flings;
Sonorous through the shaded air it sings;
Couch’d to the earth, tempestuous as it flies,
The crowd gaze upward while it cleaves the skies.
Beyond all marks, with many a giddy round
Down-rushing, it up-turns a hill of ground.

That Instant Pallas, bursting from a cloud,
Fix’d a distinguish’d mark, and cried aloud:

“E’en he who, sightless, wants his visual ray
May by his touch alone award the day:
Thy signal throw transcends the utmost bound
Of every champion by a length of ground:
Securely bid the strongest of the train
Arise to throw; the strongest throws in vain.”

She spoke: and momentary mounts the sky:
The friendly voice Ulysses hears with joy.
Then thus aloud (elate with decent pride)
“Rise, ye Phæacians, try your force (he cried):
If with this throw the strongest caster vie,
Still, further still, I bid the discus fly.
Stand forth, ye champions, who the gauntlet wield,
Or ye, the swiftest racers of the field!
Stand forth, ye wrestlers, who these pastimes grace!
I wield the gauntlet, and I run the race.
In such heroic games I yield to none,
Or yield to brave Laodamas alone:
Shall I with brave Laodamas contend?
A friend is sacred, and I style him friend.
Ungenerous were the man, and base of heart,
Who takes the kind, and pays the ungrateful part:
Chiefly the man, in foreign realms confined,
Base to his friend, to his own interest blind:
All, all your heroes I this day defy;
Give me a man that we our might may try.
Expert in every art, I boast the skill
To give the feather’d arrow wings to kill;
Should a whole host at once discharge the bow,
My well-aim’d shaft with death prevents the foe:
Alone superior in the field of Troy,
Great Philoctetes taught the shaft to fly.
From all the sons of earth unrivall’d praise
I justly claim; but yield to better days,
To those famed days when great Alcides rose,
And Eurytus, who bade the gods be foes
(Vain Eurytus, whose art became his crime,
Swept from the earth, he perish’d in his prime:
Sudden the irremeable way he trod,
Who boldly durst defy the bowyer god).
In fighting fields as far the spear I throw
As flies an arrow from the well-drawn bow.
Sole in the race the contest I decline,
Stiff are my weary joints, and I resign;
By storms and hunger worn; age well may fail,
When storms and hunger doth at once assail.”

Abash’d, the numbers hear the godlike man,
Till great Alcinous mildly thus began:

“Well hast thou spoke, and well thy generous tongue
With decent pride refutes a public wrong:
Warm are thy words, but warm without offence;
Fear only fools, secure in men of sense;
Thy worth is known. Then hear our country’s claim,
And bear to heroes our heroic fame:
In distant realms our glorious deeds display,
Repeat them frequent in the genial day;
When, blest with ease, thy woes and wanderings end,
Teach them thy consort, bid thy sons attend;
How, loved of Jove, he crown’d our sires with praise,
How we their offspring dignify our race.

“Let other realms the deathful gauntlet wield,
Or boast the glories of the athletic field:
We in the course unrivall’d speed display,
Or through cerulean billows plough the way;
To dress, to dance, to sing, our sole delight,
The feast or bath by day, and love by night:
Rise, then, ye skill’d in measures; let him bear
Your fame to men that breathe a distant air;
And faithful say, to you the powers belong
To race, to sail, to dance, to chant the song.

“But, herald, to the palace swift repair,
And the soft lyre to grace our pastimes bear.”

Swift at the word, obedient to the king,
The herald flies the tuneful lyre to bring.
Up rose nine seniors, chosen to survey
The future games, the judges of the day
With instant care they mark a spacious round
And level for the dance the allotted ground:
The herald bears the lyre: intent to play,
The bard advancing meditates the lay.
Skill’d in the dance, tall youths, a blooming band,
Graceful before the heavenly minstrel stand:
Light bounding from the earth, at once they rise,
Their feet half-viewless quiver in the skies:
Ulysses gazed, astonish’d to survey
The glancing splendours as their sandals play.
Meantime the bard, alternate to the strings,
The loves of Mars and Cytherea sings:
How the stern god, enamour’d with her charms
Clasp’d the gay panting goddess in his arms,
By bribes seduced; and how the sun, whose eye
Views the broad heavens, disclosed the lawless joy.
Stung to the soul, indignant through the skies
To his black forge vindictive Vulcan flies:
Arrived, his sinewy arms incessant place
The eternal anvil on the massy base.
A wondrous net he labours, to betray
The wanton lovers, as entwined they lay,
Indissolubly strong; Then instant bears
To his immortal dome the finish’d snares:
Above, below, around, with art dispread,
The sure inclosure folds the genial bed:
Whose texture even the search of gods deceives,
Thin as the filmy threads the spider weaves,
Then, as withdrawing from the starry bowers,
He feigns a journey to the Lemnian shores,
His favourite isle: observant Mars descries
His wish’d recess, and to the goddess flies;
He glows, he burns, the fair-hair’d queen of love
Descends, smooth gliding from the courts of Jove,
Gay blooming in full charms: her hand he press’d
With eager joy, and with a sigh address’d:

“Come, my beloved! and taste the soft delights:
Come, to repose the genial bed invites:
Thy absent spouse, neglectful of thy charms,
Prefers his barbarous Sintians to thy arms!”

Then, nothing loth, the enamour’d fair he led,
And sunk transported on the conscious bed.
Down rush’d the toils, inwrapping as they lay
The careless lovers in their wanton play:
In vain they strive; the entangling snares deny
(Inextricably firm) the power to fly.
Warn’d by the god who sheds the golden day,
Stern Vulcan homeward treads the starry way:
Arrived, he sees, he grieves, with rage he burns:
Full horribly he roars, his voice all heaven returns.

“O Jove (he cried) O all ye powers above,
See the lewd dalliance of the queen of love!
Me, awkward me, she scorns; and yields her charms
To that fair lecher, the strong god of arms.
If I am lame, that stain my natal hour
By fate imposed; such me my parent bore.
Why was I born? See how the wanton lies!
Oh sight tormenting to a husband’s eyes!
But yet, I trust, this once e’en Mars would fly
His fair-one’s arms—he thinks her, once, too nigh.
But there remain, ye guilty, in my power,
Till Jove refunds his shameless daughter’s dower.
Too dear I prized a fair enchanting face:
Beauty unchaste is beauty in disgrace.”

Meanwhile the gods the dome of Vulcan throng;
Apollo comes, and Neptune comes along;
With these gay Hermes trod the starry plain;
But modesty withheld the goddess train.
All heaven beholds, imprison’d as they lie,
And unextinguish’d laughter shakes the sky.
Then mutual, thus they spoke: “Behold on wrong
Swift vengeance waits; and art subdues the strong!
Dwells there a god on all the Olympian brow
More swift than Mars, and more than Vulcan slow?
Yet Vulcan conquers, and the god of arms
Must pay the penalty for lawless charms.”

Thus serious they; but he who gilds the skies,
The gay Apollo, thus to Hermes cries:
“Wouldst thou enchain’d like Mars, O Hermes, lie
And bear the shame like Mars to share the joy?”

“O envied shame! (the smiling youth rejoin’d;)
And thrice the chains, and thrice more firmly bind;
Gaze all ye gods, and every goddess gaze,
Yet eager would I bless the sweet disgrace.”

Loud laugh the rest, e’en Neptune laughs aloud,
Yet sues importunate to loose the god.
“And free, (he cries) O Vulcan! free from shame
Thy captives; I ensure the penal claim.”

“Will Neptune (Vulcan then) the faithless trust?
He suffers who gives surety for the unjust:
But say, if that lewd scandal of the sky,
To liberty restored, perfidious fly:
Say, wilt thou bear the mulct?” He instant cries,
“The mulct I bear, if Mars perfidious flies.”

To whom appeased: “No more I urge delay;
When Neptune sues, my part is to obey.”
Then to the snares his force the god applies;
They burst; and Mars to Thrace indignant flies:
To the soft Cyprian shores the goddess moves,
To visit Paphos and her blooming groves,
Where to the Power an hundred altars rise,
And breathing odours scent the balmy skies;
Concealed she bathes in consecrated bowers,
The Graces unguents shed, ambrosial showers,
Unguents that charm the gods! she last assumes
Her wondrous robes; and full the goddess blooms.

Thus sung the bard: Ulysses hears with joy,
And loud applauses read the vaulted sky.

Then to the sports his sons the king commands,
Each blooming youth before the monarch stands,
In dance unmatch’d! A wondrous ball is brought
(The work of Polypus, divinely wrought);
This youth with strength enormous bids it fly,
And bending backward whirls it to the sky;
His brother, springing with an active bound,
At distance intercepts it from the ground.
The ball dismissed, in dance they skim the strand,
Turn and return, and scarce imprint the sand.
The assembly gazes with astonished eyes,
And sends in shouts applauses to the skies.

Then thus Ulysses: “Happy king, whose name
The brightest shines in all the rolls of fame!
In subjects happy with surprise I gaze;
Thy praise was just; their skill transcends thy praise.”

Pleas’d with his people’s fame, the monarch hears,
And thus benevolent accosts the peers:
“Since wisdom’s sacred guidance he pursues,
Give to the stranger-guest a stranger’s dues:
Twelve princes in our realm dominion share,
O’er whom supreme, imperial power I bear;
Bring gold, a pledge of love: a talent bring,
A vest, a robe, and imitate your king.
Be swift to give: that he this night may share
The social feast of joy, with joy sincere.
And thou, Euryalus, redeem thy wrong;
A generous heart repairs a slanderous tongue.”

The assenting peers, obedient to the king,
In haste their heralds send the gifts to bring.
Then thus Euryalus: “O prince, whose sway
Rules this bless’d realm, repentant I obey;
Be his this sword, whose blade of brass displays
A ruddy gleam; whose hilt a silver blaze;
Whose ivory sheath, inwrought with curious pride,
Adds graceful terror to the wearer’s side.”

He said, and to his hand the sword consign’d:
“And if (he cried) my words affect thy mind,
Far from thy mind those words, ye whirlwinds, bear,
And scatter them, ye storms, in empty air!
Crown, O ye heavens, with joy his peaceful hours,
And grant him to his spouse, and native shores.”

“And blest be thou, my friend, (Ulysses cries,)
Crown him with every joy, ye favouring skies
To thy calm hours continued peace afford,
And never, never mayst thou want this sword,”

He said, and o’er his shoulder flung the blade.
Now o’er the earth ascends the evening shade:
The precious gifts the illustrious heralds bear,
And to the court the embodied peers repair.
Before the queen Alcinous’ sons unfold
The vests, the robes, and heaps of shining gold;
Then to the radiant thrones they move in state:
Aloft, the king in pomp imperial sate.

Thence to the queen: “O partner of our reign,
O sole beloved! command thy menial train
A polish’d chest and stately robes to bear,
And healing waters for the bath prepare;
That, bathed, our guest may bid his sorrows cease,
Hear the sweet song, and taste the feast in peace.
A bowl that flames with gold, of wondrous frame,
Ourself we give, memorial of our name;
To raise in offerings to almighty Jove,
And every god that treads the courts above.”

Instant the queen, observant of the king,
Commands her train a spacious vase to bring,
The spacious vase with ample streams suffice,
Heap the high wood, and bid the flames arise.
The flames climb round it with a fierce embrace,
The fuming waters bubble o’er the blaze.
Herself the chest prepares; in order roll’d
The robes, the vests are ranged, and heaps of gold
And adding a rich dress inwrought with art,
A gift expressive of her bounteous heart.
Thus spoke to Ithacus: “To guard with bands
Insolvable these gifts, thy care demands;
Lest, in thy slumbers on the watery main,
The hand of rapine make our bounty vain.”

Then bending with full force around he roll’d
A labyrinth of bands in fold on fold,
Closed with Circaean art. A train attends
Around the bath: the bath the king ascends
(Untasted joy, since that disastrous hour,
He sail’d ill-fated from Calypso’s bower);
Where, happy as the gods that range the sky,
He feasted every sense with every joy.
He bathes; the damsels with officious toil,
Shed sweets, shed unguents, in a shower of oil;
Then o’er his limbs a gorgeous robe he spreads,
And to the feast magnificently treads.
Full where the dome its shining valves expands,
Nausicaa blooming as a goddess stands;
With wondering eyes the hero she survey’d,
And graceful thus began the royal maid:

“Hail, godlike stranger! and when heaven restores
To thy fond wish thy long-expected shores,
This ever grateful in remembrance bear:
To me thou owest, to me, the vital air.”

“O royal maid! (Ulysses straight returns)
Whose worth the splendours of thy race adorns,
So may dread Jove (whose arm in vengeance forms
The writhen bolt, and blackens heaven with storms),
Restore me safe, through weary wanderings toss’d,
To my dear country’s ever-pleasing coast,
As while the spirit in this bosom glows,
To thee, my goddess, I address my vows;
My life, thy gift I boast!” He said, and sate
Fast by Alcinous on a throne of state.

Now each partakes the feast, the wine prepares,
Portions the food, and each his portion shares.
The bard a herald guides; the gazing throng
Pay low obeisance as he moves along:
Beneath a sculptur’d arch he sits enthroned,
The peers encircling form an awful round.
Then, from the chine, Ulysses carves with art
Delicious food, an honorary part:
“This, let the master of the lyre receive,
A pledge of love! ’tis all a wretch can give.
Lives there a man beneath the spacious skies
Who sacred honours to the bard denies?
The Muse the bard inspires, exalts his mind;
The muse indulgent loves the harmonious kind.”

The herald to his hand the charge conveys,
Not fond of flattery, nor unpleased with praise.

When now the rage of hunger was allay’d,
Thus to the lyrist wise Ulysses said:
“O more than man! thy soul the muse inspires,
Or Phœbus animates with all his fires;
For who, by Phœbus uninform’d, could know
The woe of Greece, and sing so well the woe?
Just to the tale, as present at the fray,
Or taught the labours of the dreadful day:
The song recalls past horrors to my eyes,
And bids proud Ilion from her ashes rise.
Once more harmonious strike the sounding string,
The Epaean fabric, framed by Pallas, sing:
How stern Ulysses, furious to destroy,
With latent heroes sack’d imperial Troy.
If faithful thou record the tale of Fame,
The god himself inspires thy breast with flame
And mine shall be the task henceforth to raise
In every land thy monument of praise.”

Full of the god he raised his lofty strain:
How the Greeks rush’d tumultuous to the main;
How blazing tents illumined half the skies,
While from the shores the winged navy flies;
How e’en in Ilion’s walls, in deathful bands,
Came the stern Greeks by Troy’s assisting hands:
All Troy up-heaved the steed; of differing mind,
Various the Trojans counsell’d: part consign’d
The monster to the sword, part sentence gave
To plunge it headlong in the whelming wave;
The unwise award to lodge it in the towers,
An offering sacred to the immortal powers:
The unwise prevail, they lodge it in the walls,
And by the gods’ decree proud Ilion falls:
Destruction enters in the treacherous wood,
And vengeful slaughter, fierce for human blood.

He sung the Greeks stern-issuing from the steed,
How Ilion burns, how all her fathers bleed;
How to thy dome, Deiphobus! ascends
The Spartan king; how Ithacus attends
(Horrid as Mars); and how with dire alarms
He fights—subdues, for Pallas strings his arms

Thus while he sung, Ulysses’ griefs renew,
Tears bathe his cheeks, and tears the ground bedew
As some fond matron views in mortal fight
Her husband falling in his country’s right;
Frantic through clashing swords she runs, she flies,
As ghastly pale he groans, and faints and dies;
Close to his breast she grovels on the ground,
And bathes with floods of tears the gaping wound;
She cries, she shrieks: the fierce insulting foe
Relentless mocks her violence of woe:
To chains condemn’d, as wildly she deplores;
A widow, and a slave on foreign shores.

So from the sluices of Ulysses’ eyes
Fast fell the tears, and sighs succeeded sighs:
Conceal’d he grieved: the king observed alone
The silent tear, and heard the secret groan;
Then to the bard aloud: “O cease to sing,
Dumb be thy voice, and mute the tuneful string;
To every note his tears responsive flow,
And his great heart heaves with tumultuous woe;
Thy lay too deeply moves: then cease the lay,
And o’er the banquet every heart be gay:
This social right demands: for him the sails,
Floating in air, invite the impelling gales:
His are the gifts of love: the wise and good
Receive the stranger as a brother’s blood.

“But, friend, discover faithful what I crave;
Artful concealment ill becomes the brave:
Say what thy birth, and what the name you bore,
Imposed by parents in the natal hour?
(For from the natal hour distinctive names,
One common right, the great and lowly claims:)
Say from what city, from what regions toss’d,
And what inhabitants those regions boast?
So shalt thou instant reach the realm assign’d,
In wondrous ships, self-moved, instinct with mind;
No helm secures their course, no pilot guides;
Like man intelligent, they plough the tides,
Conscious of every coast, and every bay,
That lies beneath the sun’s all-seeing ray;
Though clouds and darkness veil the encumber’d sky,
Fearless through darkness and through clouds they fly;
Though tempests rage, though rolls the swelling main,
The seas may roll, the tempests rage in vain;
E’en the stern god that o’er the waves presides,
Safe as they pass, and safe repass the tides,
With fury burns; while careless they convey
Promiscuous every guest to every bay,
These ears have heard my royal sire disclose
A dreadful story, big with future woes;
How Neptune raged, and how, by his command,
Firm rooted in a surge a ship should stand
A monument of wrath; how mound on mound
Should bury these proud towers beneath the ground.
But this the gods may frustrate or fulfil,
As suits the purpose of the Eternal Will.
But say through what waste regions hast thou stray’d
What customs noted, and what coasts survey’d;
Possess’d by wild barbarians fierce in arms,
Or men whose bosom tender pity warms?
Say why the fate of Troy awaked thy cares,
Why heaved thy bosom, and why flowed thy tears?
Just are the ways of Heaven: from Heaven proceed
The woes of man; Heaven doom’d the Greeks to bleed,
A theme of future song! Say, then, if slain
Some dear-loved brother press’d the Phrygian plain?
Or bled some friend, who bore a brother’s part,
And claim’d by merit, not by blood, the heart?”





Then thus Ulysses: “Thou whom first in sway,
As first in virtue, these thy realms obey;
How sweet the products of a peaceful reign!
The heaven-taught poet and enchanting strain;
The well-filled palace, the perpetual feast,
A land rejoicing, and a people bless’d!
How goodly seems it ever to employ
Man’s social days in union and in joy;
The plenteous hoard high-heap’d with cates divine,
And o’er the foaming bowl the laughing wine!

“Amid these joys, why seeks thy mind to know
The unhappy series of a wanderer’s woe?
Rememberance sad, whose image to review,
Alas, I must open all my wounds anew!
And oh, what first, what last shall I relate,
Of woes unnumbered sent by Heaven and Fate?

“Know first the man (though now a wretch distress’d)
Who hopes thee, monarch, for his future guest.
Behold Ulysses! no ignoble name,
Earth sounds my wisdom and high heaven my fame.

“My native soil is Ithaca the fair,
Where high Neritus waves his woods in air;
Dulichium, Same and Zaccynthus crown’d
With shady mountains spread their isles around.
(These to the north and night’s dark regions run,
Those to Aurora and the rising sun).
Low lies our isle, yet bless’d in fruitful stores;
Strong are her sons, though rocky are her shores;
And none, ah none no lovely to my sight,
Of all the lands that heaven o’erspreads with light.
In vain Calypso long constrained my stay,
With sweet, reluctant, amorous delay;
With all her charms as vainly Circe strove,
And added magic to secure my love.
In pomps or joys, the palace or the grot,
My country’s image never was forgot;
My absent parents rose before my sight,
And distant lay contentment and delight.

“Hear, then, the woes which mighty Jove ordain’d
To wait my passage from the Trojan land.
The winds from Ilion to the Cicons’ shore,
Beneath cold Ismarus our vessels bore.
We boldly landed on the hostile place,
And sack’d the city, and destroy’d the race,
Their wives made captive, their possessions shared,
And every soldier found a like reward
I then advised to fly; not so the rest,
Who stay’d to revel, and prolong the feast:
The fatted sheep and sable bulls they slay,
And bowls flow round, and riot wastes the day.
Meantime the Cicons, to their holds retired,
Call on the Cicons, with new fury fired;
With early morn the gather’d country swarms,
And all the continent is bright with arms;
Thick as the budding leaves or rising flowers
O’erspread the land, when spring descends in showers:
All expert soldiers, skill’d on foot to dare,
Or from the bounding courser urge the war.
Now fortune changes (so the Fates ordain);
Our hour was come to taste our share of pain.
Close at the ships the bloody fight began,
Wounded they wound, and man expires on man.
Long as the morning sun increasing bright
O’er heaven’s pure azure spreads the glowing light,
Promiscuous death the form of war confounds,
Each adverse battle gored with equal wounds;
But when his evening wheels o’erhung the main,
Then conquest crown’d the fierce Ciconian train.
Six brave companions from each ship we lost,
The rest escape in haste, and quit the coast,
With sails outspread we fly the unequal strife,
Sad for their loss, but joyful of our life.
Yet as we fled, our fellows’ rites we paid,
And thrice we call’d on each unhappy shade,

“Meanwhile the god, whose hand the thunder forms,
Drives clouds on clouds, and blackens heaven with storms:
Wide o’er the waste the rage of Boreas sweeps,
And night rush’d headlong on the shaded deeps.
Now here, now there, the giddy ships are borne,
And all the rattling shrouds in fragments torn.
We furl’d the sail, we plied the labouring oar,
Took down our masts, and row’d our ships to shore.
Two tedious days and two long nights we lay,
O’erwatch’d and batter’d in the naked bay.
But the third morning when Aurora brings,
We rear the masts, we spread the canvas wings;
Refresh’d and careless on the deck reclined,
We sit, and trust the pilot and the wind.
Then to my native country had I sail’d:
But, the cape doubled, adverse winds prevail’d.
Strong was the tide, which by the northern blast
Impell’d, our vessels on Cythera cast,
Nine days our fleet the uncertain tempest bore
Far in wide ocean, and from sight of shore:
The tenth we touch’d, by various errors toss’d,
The land of Lotus and the flowery coast.
We climb’d the beach, and springs of water found,
Then spread our hasty banquet on the ground.
Three men were sent, deputed from the crew
(A herald one) the dubious coast to view,
And learn what habitants possess’d the place.
They went, and found a hospitable race:
Not prone to ill, nor strange to foreign guest,
They eat, they drink, and nature gives the feast
The trees around them all their food produce:
Lotus the name: divine, nectareous juice!
(Thence call’d Lotophagi); which whose tastes,
Insatiate riots in the sweet repasts,
Nor other home, nor other care intends,
But quits his house, his country, and his friends.
The three we sent, from off the enchanting ground
We dragg’d reluctant, and by force we bound.
The rest in haste forsook the pleasing shore,
Or, the charm tasted, had return’d no more.
Now placed in order on their banks, they sweep
The sea’s smooth face, and cleave the hoary deep:
With heavy hearts we labour through the tide,
To coasts unknown, and oceans yet untried.

“The land of Cyclops first, a savage kind,
Nor tamed by manners, nor by laws confined:
Untaught to plant, to turn the glebe, and sow,
They all their products to free nature owe:
The soil, untill’d, a ready harvest yields,
With wheat and barley wave the golden fields;
Spontaneous wines from weighty clusters pour,
And Jove descends in each prolific shower,
By these no statues and no rights are known,
No council held, no monarch fills the throne;
But high on hills, or airy cliffs, they dwell,
Or deep in caves whose entrance leads to hell.
Each rules his race, his neighbour not his care,
Heedless of others, to his own severe.

“Opposed to the Cyclopean coast, there lay
An isle, whose hill their subject fields survey;
Its name Lachaea, crown’d with many a grove,
Where savage goats through pathless thickets rove:
No needy mortals here, with hunger bold,
Or wretched hunters through the wintry cold
Pursue their flight; but leave them safe to bound
From hill to hill, o’er all the desert ground.
Nor knows the soil to feed the fleecy care,
Or feels the labours of the crooked share;
But uninhabited, untill’d, unsown,
It lies, and breeds the bleating goat alone.
For there no vessel with vermilion prore,
Or bark of traffic, glides from shore to shore;
The rugged race of savages, unskill’d
The seas to traverse, or the ships to build,
Gaze on the coast, nor cultivate the soil,
Unlearn’d in all the industrious art of toil,
Yet here all products and all plants abound,
Sprung from the fruitful genius of the ground;
Fields waving high with heavy crops are seen,
And vines that flourish in eternal green,
Refreshing meads along the murmuring main,
And fountains streaming down the fruitful plain.

“A port there is, inclosed on either side,
Where ships may rest, unanchor’d and untied;
Till the glad mariners incline to sail,
And the sea whitens with the rising gale,
High at the head, from out the cavern’d rock,
In living rills a gushing fountain broke:
Around it, and above, for ever green,
The busy alders form’d a shady scene;
Hither some favouring god, beyond our thought,
Through all surrounding shade our navy brought;
For gloomy night descended on the main,
Nor glimmer’d Phoebe in the ethereal plain:
But all unseen the clouded island lay,
And all unseen the surge and rolling sea,
Till safe we anchor’d in the shelter’d bay:
Our sails we gather’d, cast our cables o’er,
And slept secure along the sandy shore.
Soon as again the rosy morning shone,
Reveal’d the landscape and the scene unknown,
With wonder seized, we view the pleasing ground,
And walk delighted, and expatiate round.
Roused by the woodland nymphs at early dawn,
The mountain goats came bounding o’er the lawn:
In haste our fellows to the ships repair,
For arms and weapons of the sylvan war;
Straight in three squadrons all our crew we part,
And bend the bow, or wing the missile dart;
The bounteous gods afford a copious prey,
And nine fat goats each vessel bears away:
The royal bark had ten. Our ships complete
We thus supplied (for twelve were all the fleet).

“Here, till the setting sun roll’d down the light,
We sat indulging in the genial rite:
Nor wines were wanting; those from ample jars
We drain’d, the prize of our Ciconian wars.
The land of Cyclops lay in prospect near:
The voice of goats and bleating flocks we hear,
And from their mountains rising smokes appear.
Now sunk the sun, and darkness cover’d o’er
The face of things: along the sea-beat shore
Satiate we slept: but, when the sacred dawn
Arising glitter’d o’er the dewy lawn,
I call’d my fellows, and these words address’d
‘My dear associates, here indulge your rest;
While, with my single ship, adventurous, I
Go forth, the manners of yon men to try;
Whether a race unjust, of barbarous might,
Rude and unconscious of a stranger’s right;
Or such who harbour pity in their breast,
Revere the gods, and succour the distress’d,’

“This said, I climb’d my vessel’s lofty side;
My train obey’d me, and the ship untied.
In order seated on their banks, they sweep
Neptune’s smooth face, and cleave the yielding deep.
When to the nearest verge of land we drew,
Fast by the sea a lonely cave we view,
High, and with darkening laurels covered o’er;
Where sheep and goats lay slumbering round the shore:
Near this, a fence of marble from the rock,
Brown with o’erarching pine and spreading oak.
A giant shepherd here his flock maintains
Far from the rest, and solitary reigns,
In shelter thick of horrid shade reclined;
And gloomy mischiefs labour in his mind.
A form enormous! far unlike the race
Of human birth, in stature, or in face;
As some lone mountain’s monstrous growth he stood,
Crown’d with rough thickets, and a nodding wood.
I left my vessel at the point of land,
And close to guard it, gave our crew command:
With only twelve, the boldest and the best,
I seek the adventure, and forsake the rest.
Then took a goatskin fill’d with precious wine,
The gift of Maron of Evantheus’ line
(The priest of Phœbus at the Ismarian shrine).
In sacred shade his honour’d mansion stood
Amidst Apollo’s consecrated wood;
Him, and his house, Heaven moved my mind to save,
And costly presents in return he gave;
Seven golden talents to perfection wrought,
A silver bowl that held a copious draught,
And twelve large vessels of unmingled wine,
Mellifluous, undecaying, and divine!
Which now, some ages from his race conceal’d,
The hoary sire in gratitude reveal’d.
Such was the wine: to quench whose fervent steam
Scarce twenty measures from the living stream
To cool one cup sufficed: the goblet crown’d
Breathed aromatic fragrances around.
Of this an ample vase we heaved aboard,
And brought another with provisions stored.
My soul foreboded I should find the bower
Of some fell monster, fierce with barbarous power;
Some rustic wretch, who lived in Heaven’s despite,
Contemning laws, and trampling on the right.
The cave we found, but vacant all within
(His flock the giant tended on the green):
But round the grot we gaze; and all we view,
In order ranged our admiration drew:
The bending shelves with loads of cheeses press’d,
The folded flocks each separate from the rest
(The larger here, and there the lesser lambs,
The new-fallen young here bleating for their dams:
The kid distinguish’d from the lambkin lies);
The cavern echoes with responsive cries.
Capacious chargers all around were laid.
Full pails, and vessels of the milking trade.
With fresh provisions hence our fleet to store
My friends advise me, and to quit the shore.
Or drive a flock of sheep and goats away,
Consult our safety, and put off to sea.
Their wholesome counsel rashly I declined,
Curious to view the man of monstrous kind,
And try what social rites a savage lends:
Dire rites, alas! and fatal to my friends

“Then first a fire we kindle, and prepare
For his return with sacrifice and prayer;
The loaden shelves afford us full repast;
We sit expecting. Lo! he comes at last,
Near half a forest on his back he bore,
And cast the ponderous burden at the door.
It thunder’d as it fell. We trembled then,
And sought the deep recesses of the den.
New driven before him through the arching rock,
Came tumbling, heaps on heaps, the unnumber’d flock.
Big-udder’d ewes, and goats of female kind
(The males were penn’d in outward courts behind);
Then, heaved on high, a rock’s enormous weight
To the cave’s mouth he roll’d, and closed the gate
(Scarce twenty four-wheel’d cars, compact and strong,
The massy load could bear, or roll along).
He next betakes him to his evening cares,
And, sitting down, to milk his flocks prepares;
Of half their udders eases first the dams,
Then to the mother’s teat submits the lambs;
Half the white stream to hardening cheese be press’d,
And high in wicker-baskets heap’d: the rest,
Reserved in bowls, supplied his nightly feast.
His labour done, he fired the pile, that gave
A sudden blaze, and lighted all the cave.
We stand discover’d by the rising fires;
Askance the giant glares, and thus inquires:

“‘What are ye, guests? on what adventure, say,
Thus far ye wander through the watery way?
Pirates perhaps, who seek through seas unknown
The lives of others, and expose your own?’

“His voice like thunder through the cavern sounds;
My bold companions thrilling fear confounds,
Appall’d at sight of more than mortal man!
At length, with heart recover’d, I began:

“‘From Troy’s famed fields, sad wanderers o’er the main,
Behold the relics of the Grecian train:
Through various seas, by various perils toss’d,
And forced by storms, unwilling on your coast;
Far from our destined course and native land,
Such was our fate, and such high Jove’s command!
Nor what we are befits us to disclaim,
Atrides’ friends (in arms a mighty name),
Who taught proud Troy and all her sons to bow;
Victors of late, but humble suppliants now!
Low at thy knee thy succour we implore;
Respect us, human, and relieve us, poor.
At least, some hospitable gift bestow;
’Tis what the happy to the unhappy owe;
’Tis what the gods require: those gods revere;
The poor and stranger are their constant care;
To Jove their cause, and their revenge belongs,
He wanders with them, and he feels their wrongs.”

“‘Fools that ye are (the savage thus replies,
His inward fury blazing at his eyes),
Or strangers, distant far from our abodes,
To bid me reverence or regard the gods.
Know then, we Cyclops are a race above
Those air-bred people, and their goat-nursed Jove;
And learn, our power proceeds with thee and thine,
Not as he wills, but as ourselves incline.
But answer, the good ship that brought ye o’er,
Where lies she anchor’d? near or off the shore?’

“Thus he. His meditated fraud I find
(Versed in the turns of various human-kind):
And, cautious thus: ‘Against a dreadful rock,
Fast by your shore the gallant vessel broke.
Scarce with these few I ’scaped; of all my train,
Whom angry Neptune, whelm’d beneath the main,
The scattered wreck the winds blew back again.’

“He answer’d with his deed: his bloody hand
Snatch’d two, unhappy! of my martial band;
And dash’d like dogs against the stony floor:
The pavement swims with brains and mingled gore.
Torn limb from limb, he spreads his horrid feast,
And fierce devours it like a mountain beast:
He sucks the marrow, and the blood he drains,
Nor entrails, flesh, nor solid bone remains.
We see the death from which we cannot move,
And humbled groan beneath the hand of Jove.
His ample maw with human carnage fill’d,
A milky deluge next the giant swill’d;
Then stretch’d in length o’er half the cavern’d rock,
Lay senseless, and supine, amidst the flock.
To seize the time, and with a sudden wound
To fix the slumbering monster to the ground,
My soul impels me! and in act I stand
To draw the sword; but wisdom held my hand.
A deed so rash had finished all our fate,
No mortal forces from the lofty gate
Could roll the rock. In hopeless grief we lay,
And sigh, expecting the return of day.
Now did the rosy-fingered morn arise,
And shed her sacred light along the skies;
He wakes, he lights the fire, he milks the dams,
And to the mother’s teats submits the lambs.
The task thus finish’d of his morning hours,
Two more he snatches, murders, and devours.
Then pleased, and whistling, drives his flock before,
Removes the rocky mountain from the door,
And shuts again: with equal ease disposed,
As a light quiver’s lid is oped and closed.
His giant voice the echoing region fills:
His flocks, obedient, spread o’er all the hills.

“Thus left behind, even in the last despair
I thought, devised, and Pallas heard my prayer.
Revenge, and doubt, and caution, work’d my breast;
But this of many counsels seem’d the best:
The monster’s club within the cave I spied,
A tree of stateliest growth, and yet undried,
Green from the wood: of height and bulk so vast,
The largest ship might claim it for a mast.
This shorten’d of its top, I gave my train
A fathom’s length, to shape it and to plane;
The narrower end I sharpen’d to a spire,
Whose point we harden’d with the force of fire,
And hid it in the dust that strew’d the cave,
Then to my few companions, bold and brave,
Proposed, who first the venturous deed should try,
In the broad orbit of his monstrous eye
To plunge the brand and twirl the pointed wood,
When slumber next should tame the man of blood.
Just as I wished, the lots were cast on four:
Myself the fifth. We stand and wait the hour.
He comes with evening: all his fleecy flock
Before him march, and pour into the rock:
Not one, or male or female, stayed behind
(So fortune chanced, or so some god designed);
Then heaving high the stone’s unwieldy weight,
He roll’d it on the cave and closed the gate.
First down he sits, to milk the woolly dams,
And then permits their udder to the lambs.
Next seized two wretches more, and headlong cast,
Brain’d on the rock; his second dire repast.
I then approach’d him reeking with their gore,
And held the brimming goblet foaming o’er;
‘Cyclop! since human flesh has been thy feast,
Now drain this goblet, potent to digest;
Know hence what treasures in our ship we lost,
And what rich liquors other climates boast.
We to thy shore the precious freight shall bear,
If home thou send us and vouchsafe to spare.
But oh! thus furious, thirsting thus for gore,
The sons of men shall ne’er approach thy shore,
And never shalt thou taste this nectar more,’

“He heard, he took, and pouring down his throat,
Delighted, swill’d the large luxurious draught,
‘More! give me more (he cried): the boon be thine,
Whoe’er thou art that bear’st celestial wine!
Declare thy name: not mortal is this juice,
Such as the unbless’d Cyclopaean climes produce
(Though sure our vine the largest cluster yields,
And Jove’s scorn’d thunder serves to drench our fields);
But this descended from the bless’d abodes,
A rill of nectar, streaming from the gods.’

“He said, and greedy grasped the heady bowl,
Thrice drained, and poured the deluge on his soul.
His sense lay covered with the dozy fume;
While thus my fraudful speech I reassume.
‘Thy promised boon, O Cyclop! now I claim,
And plead my title; Noman is my name.
By that distinguish’d from my tender years,
’Tis what my parents call me, and my peers.

“The giant then: ‘Our promis’d grace receive,
The hospitable boon we mean to give:
When all thy wretched crew have felt my power,
Noman shall be the last I will devour.’

“He said: then nodding with the fumes of wine
Droop’d his huge head, and snoring lay supine.
His neck obliquely o’er his shoulders hung,
Press’d with the weight of sleep that tames the strong:
There belch’d the mingled streams of wine and blood,
And human flesh, his indigested food.
Sudden I stir the embers, and inspire
With animating breath the seeds of fire:
Each drooping spirit with bold words repair,
And urged my train the dreadful deed to dare.
The stake now glow’d beneath the burning bed
(Green as it was) and sparkled fiery red,
Then forth the vengeful instrument I bring;
With beating hearts my fellows form a ring.
Urged my some present god, they swift let fall
The pointed torment on his visual ball.
Myself above them from a rising ground
Guide the sharp stake, and twirl it round and round.
As when a shipwright stands his workmen o’er,
Who ply the wimble, some huge beam to bore;
Urged on all hands, it nimbly spins about,
The grain deep-piercing till it scoops it out:
In his broad eye he whirls the fiery wood;
From the pierced pupil spouts the boiling blood;
Singed are his brows; the scorching lids grow black;
The jelly bubbles, and the fibres crack.
And as when armourers temper in the ford
The keen-edged pole-axe, or the shining sword,
The red-hot metal hisses in the lake,
Thus in his eye-ball hiss’d the plunging stake.
He sends a dreadful groan, the rocks around
Through all their inmost winding caves resound.
Scared we recoiled. Forth with frantic hand,
He tore and dash’d on earth and gory brand;
Then calls the Cyclops, all that round him dwell,
With voice like thunder, and a direful yell.
From all their dens the one-eyed race repair,
From rifted rocks, and mountains bleak in air.
All haste assembled, at his well-known roar,
Inquire the cause, and crowd the cavern door.

“‘What hurts thee, Polypheme? what strange affright
Thus breaks our slumbers, and disturbs the night?
Does any mortal, in the unguarded hour
Of sleep, oppress thee, or by fraud or power?
Or thieves insidious thy fair flock surprise?’
Thus they; the Cyclop from his den replies:

“‘Friends, Noman kills me; Noman in the hour
Of sleep, oppresses me with fraudful power.’
‘If no man hurt thee, but the hand divine
Inflict disease, it fits thee to resign:
To Jove or to thy father Neptune pray.’
The brethren cried, and instant strode away.
“Joy touch’d my secret soul and conscious heart,
Pleased with the effect of conduct and of art.
Meantime the Cyclop, raging with his wound,
Spreads his wide arms, and searches round and round:
At last, the stone removing from the gate,
With hands extended in the midst he sate;
And search’d each passing sheep, and felt it o’er,
Secure to seize us ere we reach’d the door
(Such as his shallow wit he deem’d was mine);
But secret I revolved the deep design:
’Twas for our lives my labouring bosom wrought;
Each scheme I turn’d, and sharpen’d every thought;
This way and that I cast to save my friends,
Till one resolve my varying counsel ends.

“Strong were the rams, with native purple fair,
Well fed, and largest of the fleecy care,
These, three and three, with osier bands we tied
(The twining bands the Cyclop’s bed supplied);
The midmost bore a man, the outward two
Secured each side: so bound we all the crew,
One ram remain’d, the leader of the flock:
In his deep fleece my grasping hands I lock,
And fast beneath, in wooly curls inwove,
There cling implicit, and confide in Jove.
When rosy morning glimmer’d o’er the dales,
He drove to pasture all the lusty males:
The ewes still folded, with distended thighs
Unmilk’d lay bleating in distressful cries.
But heedless of those cares, with anguish stung,
He felt their fleeces as they pass’d along
(Fool that he was.) and let them safely go,
All unsuspecting of their freight below.

“The master ram at last approach’d the gate,
Charged with his wool, and with Ulysses’ fate.
Him while he pass’d, the monster blind bespoke:
‘What makes my ram the lag of all the flock?
First thou wert wont to crop the flowery mead,
First to the field and river’s bank to lead,
And first with stately step at evening hour
Thy fleecy fellows usher to their bower.
Now far the last, with pensive pace and slow
Thou movest, as conscious of thy master’s woe!
Seest thou these lids that now unfold in vain?
(The deed of Noman and his wicked train!)
Oh! did’st thou feel for thy afflicted lord,
And would but Fate the power of speech afford.
Soon might’st thou tell me, where in secret here
The dastard lurks, all trembling with his fear:
Swung round and round, and dash’d from rock to rock,
His battered brains should on the pavement smoke
No ease, no pleasure my sad heart receives,
While such a monster as vile Noman lives.’

“The giant spoke, and through the hollow rock
Dismiss’d the ram, the father of the flock.
No sooner freed, and through the inclosure pass’d,
First I release myself, my fellows last:
Fat sheep and goats in throngs we drive before,
And reach our vessel on the winding shore.
With joy the sailors view their friends return’d,
And hail us living whom as dead they mourn’d
Big tears of transport stand in every eye:
I check their fondness, and command to fly.
Aboard in haste they heave the wealthy sheep,
And snatch their oars, and rush into the deep.

“Now off at sea, and from the shallows clear,
As far as human voice could reach the ear,
With taunts the distant giant I accost:
‘Hear me, O Cyclop! hear, ungracious host!
’Twas on no coward, no ignoble slave,
Thou meditatest thy meal in yonder cave;
But one, the vengeance fated from above
Doom’d to inflict; the instrument of Jove.
Thy barbarous breach of hospitable bands,
The god, the god revenges by my hands.’

“These words the Cyclop’s burning rage provoke;
From the tall hill he rends a pointed rock;
High o’er the billows flew the massy load,
And near the ship came thundering on the flood.
It almost brush’d the helm, and fell before:
The whole sea shook, and refluent beat the shore,
The strong concussion on the heaving tide
Roll’d back the vessel to the island’s side:
Again I shoved her off: our fate to fly,
Each nerve we stretch, and every oar we ply.
Just ’scaped impending death, when now again
We twice as far had furrow’d back the main,
Once more I raise my voice; my friends, afraid,
With mild entreaties my design dissuade:
‘What boots the godless giant to provoke,
Whose arm may sink us at a single stroke?
Already when the dreadful rock he threw,
Old Ocean shook, and back his surges flew.
The sounding voice directs his aim again;
The rock o’erwhelms us, and we ’scaped in vain.’

“But I, of mind elate, and scorning fear,
Thus with new taunts insult the monster’s ear:
‘Cyclop! if any, pitying thy disgrace.
Ask, who disfigured thus that eyeless face?
Say ’twas Ulysses: ’twas his deed declare,
Laertes’ son, of Ithaca the fair;
Ulysses, far in fighting fields renown’d,
Before whose arm Troy tumbled to the ground.’

“The astonished savage with a roar replies:
‘Oh heavens! oh faith of ancient prophecies!
This, Telemus Eurymedes foretold
(The mighty seer who on these hills grew old;
Skill’d the dark fates of mortals to declare,
And learn’d in all wing’d omens of the air);
Long since he menaced, such was Fate’s command;
And named Ulysses as the destined hand.
I deem’d some godlike giant to behold,
Or lofty hero, haughty, brave, and bold;
Not this weak pigmy wretch, of mean design,
Who, not by strength subdued me, but by wine.
But come, accept our gifts, and join to pray
Great Neptune’s blessing on the watery way;
For his I am, and I the lineage own;
The immortal father no less boasts the son.
His power can heal me, and relight my eye;
And only his, of all the gods on high.’
“‘Oh! could this arm (I thus aloud rejoin’d)
From that vast bulk dislodge thy bloody mind,
And send thee howling to the realms of night!
As sure as Neptune cannot give thee sight.’
“Thus I; while raging he repeats his cries,
With hands uplifted to the starry skies?
‘Hear me, O Neptune; thou whose arms are hurl’d
From shore to shore, and gird the solid world;
If thine I am, nor thou my birth disown,
And if the unhappy Cyclop be thy son,
Let not Ulysses breathe his native air,
Laertes’ son, of Ithaca the fair.
If to review his country be his fate,
Be it through toils and sufferings long and late;
His lost companions let him first deplore;
Some vessel, not his own, transport him o’er;
And when at home from foreign sufferings freed,
More near and deep, domestic woes succeed!’
With imprecations thus he fill’d the air,
And angry Neptune heard the unrighteous prayer,
A larger rock then heaving from the plain,
He whirl’d it round: it sung across the main;
It fell, and brush’d the stern: the billows roar,
Shake at the weight, and refluent beat the shore.
With all our force we kept aloof to sea,
And gain’d the island where our vessels lay.
Our sight the whole collected navy cheer’d.
Who, waiting long, by turns had hoped and fear’d.
There disembarking on the green sea side,
We land our cattle, and the spoil divide;
Of these due shares to every sailor fall;
The master ram was voted mine by all;
And him (the guardian of Ulysses’ fate)
With pious mind to heaven I consecrate.
But the great god, whose thunder rends the skies,
Averse, beholds the smoking sacrifice;
And sees me wandering still from coast to coast,
And all my vessels, all my people, lost!
While thoughtless we indulge the genial rite,
As plenteous cates and flowing bowls invite;
Till evening Phœbus roll’d away the light;
Stretch’d on the shore in careless ease we rest,
Till ruddy morning purpled o’er the east;
Then from their anchors all our ships unbind,
And mount the decks, and call the willing wind.
Now, ranged in order on our banks we sweep.
With hasty strokes the hoarse-resounding deep;
Blind to the future, pensive with our fears,
Glad for the living, for the dead in tears.”






“At length we reach’d Æolias’s sea-girt shore,
Where great Hippotades the sceptre bore,
A floating isle! high-raised by toil divine,
Strong walls of brass the rocky coast confine.
Six blooming youths, in private grandeur bred,
And six fair daughters, graced the royal bed;
These sons their sisters wed, and all remain
Their parents’ pride, and pleasure of their reign.
All day they feast, all day the bowls flow round,
And joy and music through the isle resound;
At night each pair on splendid carpets lay,
And crown’d with love the pleasures of the day.
This happy port affords our wandering fleet
A month’s reception, and a safe retreat.
Full oft the monarch urged me to relate
The fall of Ilion, and the Grecian fate;
Full oft I told: at length for parting moved;
The king with mighty gifts my suit approved.
The adverse winds in leathern bags he braced,
Compress’d their force, and lock’d each struggling blast.
For him the mighty sire of gods assign’d
The tempest’s lord, the tyrant of the wind;
His word alone the listening storms obey,
To smooth the deep, or swell the foamy sea.
These in my hollow ship the monarch hung,
Securely fetter’d by a silver thong:
But Zephyrus exempt, with friendly gales
He charged to fill, and guide the swelling sails:
Rare gift! but O, what gift to fools avails!

“Nine prosperous days we plied the labouring oar;
The tenth presents our welcome native shore:
The hills display the beacon’s friendly light,
And rising mountains gain upon our sight.
Then first my eyes, by watchful toils oppress’d,
Complied to take the balmy gifts of rest:
Then first my hands did from the rudder part
(So much the love of home possess’d my heart):
When lo! on board a fond debate arose;
What rare device those vessels might inclose?
What sum, what prize from Æolus I brought?
Whilst to his neighbour each express’d his thought:

“‘Say, whence ye gods, contending nations strive
Who most shall please, who most our hero give?
Long have his coffers groan’d with Trojan spoils:
Whilst we, the wretched partners of his toils,
Reproach’d by want, our fruitless labours mourn,
And only rich in barren fame return.
Now Æolus, ye see, augments his store:
But come, my friends, these mystic gifts explore,’
They said: and (oh cursed fate!) the thongs unbound!
The gushing tempest sweeps the ocean round;
Snatch’d in the whirl, the hurried navy flew,
The ocean widen’d and the shores withdrew.
Roused from my fatal sleep I long debate
If still to live, or desperate plunge to fate;
Thus doubting, prostrate on the deck I lay,
Till all the coward thoughts of death gave way.

“Meanwhile our vessels plough the liquid plain,
And soon the known AEolian coast regain;
Our groan the rocks remurmur’d to the main.
We leap’d on shore, and with a scanty feast
Our thirst and hunger hastily repress’d;
That done, two chosen heralds straight attend
Our second progress to my royal friend;
And him amidst his jovial sons we found;
The banquet steaming, and the goblets crown’d;
There humbly stoop’d with conscious shame and awe,
Nor nearer than the gate presumed to draw.
But soon his sons their well-known guest descried,
And starting from their couches loudly cried:
‘Ulysses here! what demon could’st thou meet
To thwart thy passage, and repel thy fleet?
Wast thou not furnish’d by our choicest care
For Greece, for home and all thy soul held dear?’
Thus they, In silence long my fate I mourn’d;
At length these words with accents low return’d:
`Me, lock’d in sleep, my faithless crew bereft
Of all the blessing of your godlike gift!
But grant, oh grant, our loss we may retrieve;
A favour you, and you alone can give.’

“Thus I with art to move their pity tried,
And touch’d the youths; but their stern sire replied:
‘Vile wretch, begone! this instant I command
Thy fleet accursed to leave our hallow’d land.
His baneful suit pollutes these bless’d abodes,
Whose fate proclaims him hateful to the gods.’

“Thus fierce he said: we sighing went our way,
And with desponding hearts put off to sea.
The sailors spent with toils their folly mourn,
But mourn in vain; no prospect of return
Six days and nights a doubtful course we steer,
The next proud Lamos’ stately towers appear,
And Laestrygonia’s gates arise distinct in air.
The shepherd, quitting here at night the plain,
Calls, to succeed his cares, the watchful swain;
But he that scorns the chains of sleep to wear,
And adds the herdsman’s to the shepherd’s care,
So near the pastures, and so short the way,
His double toils may claim a double pay,
And join the labours of the night and day.

“Within a long recess a bay there lies,
Edged round with cliffs high pointing to the skies;
The jutting shores that swell on either side
Contract its mouth, and break the rushing tide.
Our eager sailors seize the fair retreat,
And bound within the port their crowded fleet:
For here retired the sinking billows sleep,
And smiling calmness silver’d o’er the deep.
I only in the bay refused to moor,
And fix’d without, my halsers to the shore.

“From thence we climb’d a point, whose airy brow
Commands the prospect of the plains below;
No tracks of beasts, or signs of men, we found,
But smoky volumes rolling from the ground.
Two with our herald thither we command,
With speed to learn what men possess’d the land.
They went, and kept the wheel’s smooth-beaten road
Which to the city drew the mountain wood;
When lo! they met, beside a crystal spring,
The daughter of Antiphates the king;
She to Artacia’s silver streams came down;
(Artacia’s streams alone supply the town);
The damsel they approach, and ask’d what race
The people were? who monarch of the place?
With joy the maid the unwary strangers heard
And show’d them where the royal dome appear’d.
They went; but as they entering saw the queen
Of size enormous, and terrific mien
(Not yielding to some bulky mountain’s height),
A sudden horror struck their aching sight.
Swift at her call her husband scour’d away
To wreak his hunger on the destined prey;
One for his food the raging glutton slew,
But two rush’d out, and to the navy flew.

“Balk’d of his prey, the yelling monster flies,
And fills the city with his hideous cries;
A ghastly band of giants hear the roar,
And, pouring down the mountains, crowd the shore.
Fragments they rend from off the craggy brow
And dash the ruins on the ships below;
The crackling vessels burst; hoarse groans arise,
And mingled horrors echo to the skies;
The men like fish, they struck upon the flood,
And cramm’d their filthy throats with human food.
Whilst thus their fury rages at the bay,
My sword our cables cut, I call’d to weigh;
And charged my men, as they from fate would fly,
Each nerve to strain, each bending oar to ply.
The sailors catch the word, their oars they seize,
And sweep with equal strokes the smoky seas;
Clear of the rocks the impatient vessel flies;
Whilst in the port each wretch encumber’d dies.
With earnest haste my frighted sailors press,
While kindling transports glow’d at our success;
But the sad fate that did our friends destroy,
Cool’d every breast, and damp’d the rising joy.

“Now dropp’d our anchors in the Ææan bay,
Where Circe dwelt, the daughter of the Day!
Her mother Perse, of old Ocean’s strain,
Thus from the Sun descended, and the Main
(From the same lineage stern Aeaetes came,
The far-famed brother of the enchantress dame);
Goddess, the queen, to whom the powers belong
Of dreadful magic and commanding song.
Some god directing to this peaceful bay
Silent we came, and melancholy lay,
Spent and o’erwatch’d. Two days and nights roll’d on,
And now the third succeeding morning shone.
I climb’d a cliff, with spear and sword in hand,
Whose ridge o’erlook’d a shady length of land;
To learn if aught of mortal works appear,
Or cheerful voice of mortal strike the ear?
From the high point I mark’d, in distant view,
A stream of curling smoke ascending blue,
And spiry tops, the tufted trees above,
Of Circe’s palace bosom’d in the grove.

“Thither to haste, the region to explore,
Was first my thought: but speeding back to shore
I deem’d it best to visit first my crew,
And send our spies the dubious coast to view.
As down the hill I solitary go,
Some power divine, who pities human woe,
Sent a tall stag, descending from the wood,
To cool his fervour in the crystal flood;
Luxuriant on the wave-worn bank he lay,
Stretch’d forth and panting in the sunny ray.
I launch’d my spear, and with a sudden wound
Transpierced his back, and fix’d him to the ground.
He falls, and mourns his fate with human cries:
Through the wide wound the vital spirit flies.
I drew, and casting on the river’s side
The bloody spear, his gather’d feet I tied
With twining osiers which the bank supplied.
An ell in length the pliant wisp I weaved,
And the huge body on my shoulders heaved:
Then leaning on my spear with both my hands,
Upbore my load, and press’d the sinking sands
With weighty steps, till at the ship I threw
The welcome burden, and bespoke my crew:

“‘Cheer up, my friends! it is not yet our fate
To glide with ghosts through Pluto’s gloomy gate.
Food in the desert land, behold! is given!
Live, and enjoy the providence of heaven.’

“The joyful crew survey his mighty size,
And on the future banquet feast their eyes,
As huge in length extended lay the beast;
Then wash their hands, and hasten to the feast.
There, till the setting sun roll’d down the light,
They sate indulging in the genial rite.
When evening rose, and darkness cover’d o’er
The face of things, we slept along the shore.
But when the rosy morning warm’d the east,
My men I summon’d, and these words address’d:
“‘Followers and friends, attend what I propose:
Ye sad companions of Ulysses’ woes!
We know not here what land before us lies,
Or to what quarter now we turn our eyes,
Or where the sun shall set, or where shall rise.
Here let us think (if thinking be not vain)
If any counsel, any hope remain.
Alas! from yonder promontory’s brow
I view’d the coast, a region flat and low;
An isle encircled with the boundless flood;
A length of thickets, and entangled wood.
Some smoke I saw amid the forest rise,
And all around it only seas and skies!’

“With broken hearts my sad companions stood,
Mindful of Cyclops and his human food,
And horrid Laestrygons, the men of blood.
Presaging tears apace began to rain;
But tears in mortal miseries are vain.
In equal parts I straight divide my band,
And name a chief each party to command;
I led the one, and of the other side
Appointed brave Eurylochus the guide.
Then in the brazen helm the lots we throw,
And fortune casts Eurylochus to go;
He march’d with twice eleven in his train;
Pensive they march, and pensive we remain.

“The palace in a woody vale they found,
High raised of stone; a shaded space around;
Where mountain wolves and brindled lions roam,
(By magic tamed,) familiar to the dome.
With gentle blandishment our men they meet,
And wag their tails, and fawning lick their feet.
As from some feast a man returning late,
His faithful dogs all meet him at the gate,
Rejoicing round, some morsel to receive,
(Such as the good man ever used to give,)
Domestic thus the grisly beasts drew near;
They gaze with wonder not unmix’d with fear.
Now on the threshold of the dome they stood,
And heard a voice resounding through the wood:
Placed at her loom within, the goddess sung;
The vaulted roofs and solid pavement rung.
O’er the fair web the rising figures shine,
Immortal labour! worthy hands divine.
Polites to the rest the question moved
(A gallant leader, and a man I loved):

“‘What voice celestial, chanting to the loom
(Or nymph, or goddess), echoes from the room?
Say, shall we seek access?’ With that they call;
And wide unfold the portals of the hall.

“The goddess, rising, asks her guests to stay,
Who blindly follow where she leads the way.
Eurylochus alone of all the band,
Suspecting fraud, more prudently remain’d.
On thrones around with downy coverings graced,
With semblance fair, the unhappy men she placed.
Milk newly press’d, the sacred flour of wheat,
And honey fresh, and Pramnian wines the treat:
But venom’d was the bread, and mix’d the bowl,
With drugs of force to darken all the soul:
Soon in the luscious feast themselves they lost,
And drank oblivion of their native coast.
Instant her circling wand the goddess waves,
To hogs transforms them, and the sty receives.
No more was seen the human form divine;
Head, face, and members, bristle into swine:
Still cursed with sense, their minds remain alone,
And their own voice affrights them when they groan.
Meanwhile the goddess in disdain bestows
The mast and acorn, brutal food! and strows
The fruits and cornel, as their feast, around;
Now prone and grovelling on unsavoury ground.

“Eurylochus, with pensive steps and slow.
Aghast returns; the messenger of woe,
And bitter fate. To speak he made essay,
In vain essay’d, nor would his tongue obey.
His swelling heart denied the words their way:
But speaking tears the want of words supply,
And the full soul bursts copious from his eye.
Affrighted, anxious for our fellows’ fates,
We press to hear what sadly he relates:

“We went, Ulysses! (such was thy command)
Through the lone thicket and the desert land.
A palace in a woody vale we found
Brown with dark forests, and with shades around.
A voice celestial echoed through the dome,
Or nymph or goddess, chanting to the loom.
Access we sought, nor was access denied:
Radiant she came: the portals open’d wide:
The goddess mild invites the guests to stay:
They blindly follow where she leads the way.
I only wait behind of all the train:
I waited long, and eyed the doors in vain:
The rest are vanish’d, none repass’d the gate,
And not a man appears to tell their fate.’

“I heard, and instant o’er my shoulder flung
The belt in which my weighty falchion hung
(A beamy blade): then seized the bended bow,
And bade him guide the way, resolved to go.
He, prostrate falling, with both hands embraced
My knees, and weeping thus his suit address’d:

“‘O king, beloved of Jove, thy servant spare,
And ah, thyself the rash attempt forbear!
Never, alas! thou never shalt return,
Or see the wretched for whose loss we mourn.
With what remains from certain ruin fly,
And save the few not fated yet to die.’

“I answer’d stern: ‘Inglorious then remain,
Here feast and loiter, and desert thy train.
Alone, unfriended, will I tempt my way;
The laws of fate compel, and I obey.’
This said, and scornful turning from the shore
My haughty step, I stalk’d the valley o’er.
Till now approaching nigh the magic bower,
Where dwelt the enchantress skill’d in herbs of power,
A form divine forth issued from the wood
(Immortal Hermes with the golden rod)
In human semblance. On his bloomy face
Youth smiled celestial, with each opening grace.
He seized my hand, and gracious thus began:
‘Ah whither roam’st thou, much-enduring man?
O blind to fate! what led thy steps to rove
The horrid mazes of this magic grove?
Each friend you seek in yon enclosure lies,
All lost their form, and habitants of sties.
Think’st thou by wit to model their escape?
Sooner shalt thou, a stranger to thy shape,
Fall prone their equal: first thy danger know,
Then take the antidote the gods bestow.
The plant I give through all the direful bower
Shall guard thee, and avert the evil hour.
Now hear her wicked arts: Before thy eyes
The bowl shall sparkle, and the banquet rise;
Take this, nor from the faithless feast abstain,
For temper’d drugs and poison shall be vain.
Soon as she strikes her wand, and gives the word,
Draw forth and brandish thy refulgent sword,
And menace death: those menaces shall move
Her alter’d mind to blandishment and love.
Nor shun the blessing proffer’d to thy arms,
Ascend her bed, and taste celestial charms;
So shall thy tedious toils a respite find,
And thy lost friends return to human kind.
But swear her first by those dread oaths that tie
The powers below, the blessed in the sky;
Lest to thee naked secret fraud be meant,
Or magic bind thee cold and impotent.’

“Thus while he spoke, the sovereign plant he drew
Where on the all-bearing earth unmark’d it grew,
And show’d its nature and its wondrous power:
Black was the root, but milky white the flower;
Moly the name, to mortals hard to find,
But all is easy to the ethereal kind.
This Hermes gave, then, gliding off the glade,
Shot to Olympus from the woodland shade.
While, full of thought, revolving fates to come,
I speed my passage to the enchanted dome.
Arrived, before the lofty gates I stay’d;
The lofty gates the goddess wide display’d;
She leads before, and to the feast invites;
I follow sadly to the magic rites.
Radiant with starry studs, a silver seat
Received my limbs: a footstool eased my feet,
She mix’d the potion, fraudulent of soul;
The poison mantled in the golden bowl.
I took, and quaff’d it, confident in heaven.
Then waved the wand, and then the word was given.
‘Hence to thy fellows! (dreadful she began:)
Go, be a beast!’—I heard, and yet was man.

“Then, sudden whirling, like a waving flame,
My beamy falchion, I assault the dame.
Struck with unusual fear, she trembling cries,
She faints, she falls; she lifts her weeping eyes.

“‘What art thou? say! from whence, from whom you came?
O more than human! tell thy race, thy name.
Amazing strength, these poisons to sustain!
Not mortal thou, nor mortal is thy brain.
Or art thou he, the man to come (foretold
By Hermes, powerful with the wand of gold),
The man from Troy, who wander’d ocean round;
The man for wisdom’s various arts renown’d,
Ulysses? Oh! thy threatening fury cease;
Sheathe thy bright sword, and join our hands in peace!
Let mutual joys our mutual trust combine,
And love, and love-born confidence, be thine.’

“‘And how, dread Circe! (furious I rejoin)
Can love, and love-born confidence, be mine,
Beneath thy charms when my companions groan,
Transform’d to beasts, with accents not their own?
O thou of fraudful heart, shall I be led
To share thy feast-rites, or ascend thy bed;
That, all unarm’d, thy vengeance may have vent,
And magic bind me, cold and impotent?
Celestial as thou art, yet stand denied;
Or swear that oath by which the gods are tied,
Swear, in thy soul no latent frauds remain,
Swear by the vow which never can be vain.’

“The goddess swore: then seized my hand, and led
To the sweet transports of the genial bed.
Ministrant to the queen, with busy care
Four faithful handmaids the soft rites prepare;
Nymphs sprung from fountains, or from shady woods,
Or the fair offspring of the sacred floods.
One o’er the couches painted carpets threw,
Whose purple lustre glow’d against the view:
White linen lay beneath. Another placed
The silver stands, with golden flaskets graced:
With dulcet beverage this the beaker crown’d,
Fair in the midst, with gilded cups around:
That in the tripod o’er the kindled pile
The water pours; the bubbling waters boil;
An ample vase receives the smoking wave;
And, in the bath prepared, my limbs I lave:
Reviving sweets repair the mind’s decay,
And take the painful sense of toil away.
A vest and tunic o’er me next she threw,
Fresh from the bath, and dropping balmy dew;
Then led and placed me on the sovereign seat,
With carpets spread; a footstool at my feet.
The golden ewer a nymph obsequious brings,
Replenish’d from the cool translucent springs;
With copious water the bright vase supplies
A silver laver of capacious size.
I wash’d. The table in fair order spread,
They heap the glittering canisters with bread:
Viands of various kinds allure the taste,
Of choicest sort and savour, rich repast!
Circe in vain invites the feast to share;
Absent I ponder, and absorb’d in care;
While scenes of woe rose anxious in my breast,
The queen beheld me, and these words address’d:

“‘Why sits Ulysses silent and apart,
Some hoard of grief close harbour’d at his heart
Untouch’d before thee stand the cates divine,
And unregarded laughs the rosy wine.
Can yet a doubt or any dread remain,
When sworn that oath which never can be vain?’

“I answered: ‘Goddess! human is my breast,
By justice sway’d, by tender pity press’d:
Ill fits it me, whose friends are sunk to beasts,
To quaff thy bowls, or riot in thy feasts.
Me would’st thou please? for them thy cares employ,
And them to me restore, and me to joy.’

“With that she parted: in her potent hand
She bore the virtue of the magic wand.
Then, hastening to the sties, set wide the door,
Urged forth, and drove the bristly herd before;
Unwieldy, out they rush’d with general cry,
Enormous beasts, dishonest to the eye.
Now touch’d by counter-charms they change again,
And stand majestic, and recall’d to men.
Those hairs of late that bristled every part,
Fall off, miraculous effect of art!
Till all the form in full proportion rise,
More young, more large, more graceful to my eyes.
They saw, they knew me, and with eager pace
Clung to their master in a long embrace:
Sad, pleasing sight! with tears each eye ran o’er,
And sobs of joy re-echoed through the bower;
E’en Circe wept, her adamantine heart
Felt pity enter, and sustain’d her part.

“‘Son of Laertes! (then the queen began)
Oh much-enduring, much experienced man!
Haste to thy vessel on the sea-beat shore,
Unload thy treasures, and the galley moor;
Then bring thy friends, secure from future harms,
And in our grottoes stow thy spoils and arms,’

“She said. Obedient to her high command
I quit the place, and hasten to the strand,
My sad companions on the beach I found,
Their wistful eyes in floods of sorrow drown’d.

“As from fresh pastures and the dewy field
(When loaded cribs their evening banquet yield)
The lowing herds return; around them throng
With leaps and bounds their late imprison’d young,
Rush to their mothers with unruly joy,
And echoing hills return the tender cry:
So round me press’d, exulting at my sight,
With cries and agonies of wild delight,
The weeping sailors; nor less fierce their joy
Than if return’d to Ithaca from Troy.
‘Ah master! ever honour’d, ever dear!
(These tender words on every side I hear)
What other joy can equal thy return?
Not that loved country for whose sight we mourn,
The soil that nursed us, and that gave us breath:
But ah! relate our lost companions’ death.’

“I answer’d cheerful: ‘Haste, your galley moor,
And bring our treasures and our arms ashore:
Those in yon hollow caverns let us lay,
Then rise, and follow where I lead the way.
Your fellows live; believe your eyes, and come
To taste the joys of Circe’s sacred dome.’

“With ready speed the joyful crew obey:
Alone Eurylochus persuades their stay.

“‘Whither (he cried), ah whither will ye run?
Seek ye to meet those evils ye should shun?
Will you the terrors of the dome explore,
In swine to grovel, or in lions roar,
Or wolf-like howl away the midnight hour
In dreadful watch around the magic bower?
Remember Cyclops, and his bloody deed;
The leader’s rashness made the soldiers bleed.’

“I heard incensed, and first resolved to speed
My flying falchion at the rebel’s head.
Dear as he was, by ties of kindred bound,
This hand had stretch’d him breathless on the ground.
But all at once my interposing train
For mercy pleaded, nor could plead in vain.
‘Leave here the man who dares his prince desert,
Leave to repentance and his own sad heart,
To guard the ship. Seek we the sacred shades
Of Circe’s palace, where Ulysses leads.’

“This with one voice declared, the rising train
Left the black vessel by the murmuring main.
Shame touch’d Eurylochus’ alter’d breast:
He fear’d my threats, and follow’d with the rest.

“Meanwhile the goddess, with indulgent cares
And social joys, the late transform’d repairs;
The bath, the feast, their fainting soul renews:
Rich in refulgent robes, and dropping balmy dews:
Brightening with joy, their eager eyes behold,
Each other’s face, and each his story told;
Then gushing tears the narrative confound,
And with their sobs the vaulted roof resound.
When hush’d their passion, thus the goddess cries:
‘Ulysses, taught by labours to be wise,
Let this short memory of grief suffice.
To me are known the various woes ye bore.
In storms by sea, in perils on the shore;
Forget whatever was in Fortune’s power,
And share the pleasures of this genial hour.
Such be your mind as ere ye left your coast,
Or learn’d to sorrow for a country lost.
Exiles and wanderers now, where’er ye go,
Too faithful memory renews your woe:
The cause removed, habitual griefs remain,
And the soul saddens by the use of pain.’

“Her kind entreaty moved the general breast;
Tired with long toil, we willing sunk to rest.
We plied the banquet, and the bowl we crown’d,
Till the full circle of the year came round.
But when the seasons following in their train,
Brought back the months, the days, and hours again;
As from a lethargy at once they rise,
And urge their chief with animating cries:

“‘Is this, Ulysses, our inglorious lot?
And is the name of Ithaca forgot?
Shall never the dear land in prospect rise,
Or the loved palace glitter in our eyes?’
“Melting I heard; yet till the sun’s decline
Prolong’d the feast, and quaff’d the rosy wine
But when the shades came on at evening hour,
And all lay slumbering in the dusky bower,
I came a suppliant to fair Circe’s bed,
The tender moment seized, and thus I said:
‘Be mindful, goddess! of thy promise made;
Must sad Ulysses ever be delay’d?
Around their lord my sad companions mourn,
Each breast beats homeward, anxious to return:
If but a moment parted from thy eyes,
Their tears flow round me, and my heart complies.’

“‘Go then (she cried), ah go! yet think, not I,
Not Circe, but the Fates, your wish deny.
Ah, hope not yet to breathe thy native air!
Far other journey first demands thy care;
To tread the uncomfortable paths beneath,
And view the realms of darkness and of death.
There seek the Theban bard, deprived of sight;
Within, irradiate with prophetic light;
To whom Persephone, entire and whole,
Gave to retain the unseparated soul:
The rest are forms, of empty ether made;
Impassive semblance, and a flitting shade.’

“Struck at the word, my very heart was dead:
Pensive I sate: my tears bedew’d the bed:
To hate the light and life my soul begun,
And saw that all was grief beneath the sun:
Composed at length the gushing tears suppress’d,
And my toss’d limbs now wearied into rest.
‘How shall I tread (I cried), ah, Circe! say,
The dark descent, and who shall guide the way?
Can living eyes behold the realms below?
What bark to waft me, and what wind to blow?’

“‘Thy fated road (the magic power replied),
Divine Ulysses! ask no mortal guide.
Rear but the mast, the spacious sail display,
The northern winds shall wing thee on thy way.
Soon shalt thou reach old Ocean’s utmost ends,
Where to the main the shelving shore descends;
The barren trees of Proserpine’s black woods,
Poplars and willows trembling o’er the floods:
There fix thy vessel in the lonely bay,
And enter there the kingdoms void of day,
Where Phlegethon’s loud torrents, rushing down,
Hiss in the flaming gulf of Acheron;
And where, slow rolling from the Stygian bed,
Cocytus’ lamentable waters spread:
Where the dark rock o’erhangs the infernal lake,
And mingling streams eternal murmurs make.
First draw thy falchion, and on every side
Trench the black earth a cubit long and wide:
To all the shades around libations pour,
And o’er the ingredients strew the hallow’d flour:
New wine and milk, with honey temper’d bring,
And living water from the crystal spring.
Then the wan shades and feeble ghosts implore,
With promised offerings on thy native shore;
A barren cow, the stateliest of the isle,
And heap’d with various wealth, a blazing pile:
These to the rest; but to the seer must bleed
A sable ram, the pride of all thy breed.
These solemn vows and holy offerings paid
To all the phantom nations of the dead,
Be next thy care the sable sheep to place
Full o’er the pit, and hellward turn their face:
But from the infernal rite thine eye withdraw,
And back to Ocean glance with reverend awe.
Sudden shall skim along the dusky glades
Thin airy shoals, and visionary shades.
Then give command the sacrifice to haste,
Let the flay’d victims in the flame be cast,
And sacred vows and mystic song applied
To grisly Pluto and his gloomy bride.
Wide o’er the pool thy falchion waved around
Shall drive the spectres from unbidden ground:
The sacred draught shall all the dead forbear,
Till awful from the shades arise the seer.
Let him, oraculous, the end, the way,
The turns of all thy future fate display,
Thy pilgrimage to come, and remnant of thy day.’

“So speaking, from the ruddy orient shone
The morn, conspicuous on her golden throne.
The goddess with a radiant tunic dress’d
My limbs, and o’er me cast a silken vest.
Long flowing robes, of purest white, array
The nymph, that added lustre to the day:
A tiar wreath’d her head with many a fold;
Her waist was circled with a zone of gold.
Forth issuing then, from place to place I flew;
Rouse man by man, and animate my crew.
‘Rise, rise, my mates! ’tis Circe gives command:
Our journey calls us; haste, and quit the land.’
All rise and follow, yet depart not all,
For Fate decreed one wretched man to fall.

“A youth there was, Elpenor was he named,
Not much for sense, nor much for courage famed:
The youngest of our band, a vulgar soul,
Born but to banquet, and to drain the bowl.
He, hot and careless, on a turret’s height
With sleep repair’d the long debauch of night:
The sudden tumult stirred him where he lay,
And down he hasten’d, but forgot the way;
Full headlong from the roof the sleeper fell,
And snapp’d the spinal joint, and waked in hell.

“The rest crowd round me with an eager look;
I met them with a sigh, and thus bespoke:
‘Already, friends! ye think your toils are o’er,
Your hopes already touch your native shore:
Alas! far otherwise the nymph declares,
Far other journey first demands our cares;
To tread the uncomfortable paths beneath,
The dreary realms of darkness and of death;
To seek Tiresias’ awful shade below,
And thence our fortunes and our fates to know.’

“My sad companions heard in deep despair;
Frantic they tore their manly growth of hair;
To earth they fell: the tears began to rain;
But tears in mortal miseries are vain,
Sadly they fared along the sea-beat shore;
Still heaved their hearts, and still their eyes ran o’er.
The ready victims at our bark we found,
The sable ewe and ram together bound.
For swift as thought the goddess had been there,
And thence had glided, viewless as the air:
The paths of gods what mortal can survey?
Who eyes their motion? who shall trace their way?”







“Now to the shores we bend, a mournful train,
Climb the tall bark, and launch into the main;
At once the mast we rear, at once unbind
The spacious sheet, and stretch it to the wind;
Then pale and pensive stand, with cares oppress’d,
And solemn horror saddens every breast.
A freshening breeze the magic power supplied,
While the wing’d vessel flew along the tide;
Our oars we shipp’d; all day the swelling sails
Full from the guiding pilot catch’d the gales.

“Now sunk the sun from his aërial height,
And o’er the shaded billows rush’d the night;
When lo! we reach’d old Ocean’s utmost bounds,
Where rocks control his waves with ever-during mounds.

“There in a lonely land, and gloomy cells,
The dusky nation of Cimmeria dwells;
The sun ne’er views the uncomfortable seats,
When radiant he advances, or retreats:
Unhappy race! whom endless night invades,
Clouds the dull air, and wraps them round in shades.

“The ship we moor on these obscure abodes;
Disbark the sheep, an offering to the gods;
And, hellward bending, o’er the beach descry
The doleful passage to the infernal sky.
The victims, vow’d to each Tartarian power,
Eurylochus and Perimedes bore.

“Here open’d hell, all hell I here implored,
And from the scabbard drew the shining sword:
And trenching the black earth on every side,
A cavern form’d, a cubit long and wide.
New wine, with honey-temper’d milk, we bring,
Then living waters from the crystal spring:
O’er these was strew’d the consecrated flour,
And on the surface shone the holy store.

“Now the wan shades we hail, the infernal gods,
To speed our course, and waft us o’er the floods:
So shall a barren heifer from the stall
Beneath the knife upon your altars fall;
So in our palace, at our safe return,
Rich with unnumber’d gifts the pile shall burn;
So shall a ram, the largest of the breed,
Black as these regions, to Tiresias bleed.

“Thus solemn rites and holy vows we paid
To all the phantom-nations of the dead;
Then died the sheep: a purple torrent flow’d,
And all the caverns smoked with streaming blood.
When lo! appear’d along the dusky coasts,
Thin, airy shoals of visionary ghosts:
Fair, pensive youths, and soft enamour’d maids;
And wither’d elders, pale and wrinkled shades;
Ghastly with wounds the forms of warriors slain
Stalk’d with majestic port, a martial train:
These and a thousand more swarm’d o’er the ground,
And all the dire assembly shriek’d around.
Astonish’d at the sight, aghast I stood,
And a cold fear ran shivering through my blood;
Straight I command the sacrifice to haste,
Straight the flay’d victims to the flames are cast,
And mutter’d vows, and mystic song applied
To grisly Pluto, and his gloomy bride.

“Now swift I waved my falchion o’er the blood;
Back started the pale throngs, and trembling stood,
Round the black trench the gore untasted flows,
Till awful from the shades Tiresias rose.

“There wandering through the gloom I first survey’d,
New to the realms of death, Elpenor’s shade:
His cold remains all naked to the sky
On distant shores unwept, unburied lie.
Sad at the sight I stand, deep fix’d in woe,
And ere I spoke the tears began to flow.

“‘O say what angry power Elpenor led
To glide in shades, and wander with the dead?
How could thy soul, by realms and seas disjoin’d,
Outfly the nimble sail, and leave the lagging wind?

“The ghost replied: ‘To hell my doom I owe,
Demons accursed, dire ministers of woe!
My feet, through wine unfaithful to their weight,
Betray’d me tumbling from a towery height:
Staggering I reel’d, and as I reel’d I fell,
Lux’d the neck-joint—my soul descends to hell.
But lend me aid, I now conjure thee lend,
By the soft tie and sacred name of friend!
By thy fond consort! by thy father’s cares!
By loved Telemachus’ blooming years?
For well I know that soon the heavenly powers
Will give thee back to-day, and Circe’s shores:
There pious on my cold remains attend,
There call to mind thy poor departed friend.
The tribute of a tear is all I crave,
And the possession of a peaceful grave.
But if, unheard, in vain compassion plead,
Revere the gods. The gods avenge the dead!
A tomb along the watery margin raise,
The tomb with manly arms and trophies grace,
To show posterity Elpenor was.
There high in air, memorial of my name,
Fix the smooth oar, and bid me live to fame.’

“To whom with tears: ‘These rites, O mournful shade,
Due to thy ghost, shall to thy ghost be paid.’

“Still as I spoke the phantom seem’d to moan,
Tear follow’d tear, and groan succeeded groan.
But, as my waving sword the blood surrounds,
The shade withdrew, and mutter’d empty sounds.

“There as the wondrous visions I survey’d,
All pale ascends my royal mother’s shade:
A queen, to Troy she saw our legions pass;
Now a thin form is all Anticlea was!
Struck at the sight I melt with filial woe,
And down my cheek the pious sorrows flow,
Yet as I shook my falchion o’er the blood,
Regardless of her son the parent stood.

“When lo! the mighty Theban I behold,
To guide his steps he bore a staff of gold;
Awful he trod; majestic was his look!
And from his holy lips these accents broke:

“‘Why, mortal, wanderest thou from cheerful day,
To tread the downward, melancholy way?
What angry gods to these dark regions led
Thee, yet alive, companion of the dead?
But sheathe thy poniard, while my tongue relates
Heaven’s steadfast purpose, and thy future fates.’

“While yet he spoke, the prophet I obey’d,
And in the scabbard plunged the glittering blade:
Eager he quaff’d the gore, and then express’d
Dark things to come, the counsels of his breast.

“Weary of light, Ulysses here explores
A prosperous voyage to his native shores;
But know—by me unerring Fates disclose
New trains of dangers, and new scenes of woes.
I see, I see, thy bark by Neptune toss’d,
For injured Cyclops, and his eyeball lost!
Yet to thy woes the gods decree an end,
If Heaven thou please: and how to please attend
Where on Trinacrian rocks the ocean roars,
Graze numerous herds along the verdant shores;
Though hunger press, yet fly the dangerous prey,
The herds are sacred to the god of day,
Who all surveys with his extensive eye,
Above, below, on earth, and in the sky!
Rob not the god; and so propitious gales
Attend thy voyage, and impel thy sails:
But, if his herds ye seize, beneath the waves
I see thy friends o’erwhelm’d in liquid graves!
The direful wreck Ulysses scarce survives!
Ulysses at his country scarce arrives!
Strangers thy guides! nor there thy labours end;
New foes arise; domestic ills attend!
There foul adulterers to thy bride resort,
And lordly gluttons riot in thy court.
But vengeance hastes amain! These eyes behold
The deathful scene, princes on princes roll’d!
That done, a people far from sea explore,
Who ne’er knew salt, or heard the billows roar,
Or saw gay vessel stem the watery plain,
A painted wonder flying on the main!
Bear on thy back an oar: with strange amaze
A shepherd meeting thee, the oar surveys,
And names a van: there fix it on the plain,
To calm the god that holds the watery reign;
A threefold offering to his altar bring,
A bull, a ram, a boar; and hail the ocean king.
But home return’d, to each ethereal power
Slay the due victim in the genial hour:
So peaceful shalt thou end thy blissful days,
And steal thyself from life by slow decays:
Unknown to pain, in age resign thy breath,
When late stern Neptune points the shaft with death:
To the dark grave retiring as to rest,
Thy people blessing, by thy people bless’d!

“Unerring truths, O man, my lips relate;
This is thy life to come, and this is fate.’

“To whom unmoved: ‘If this the gods prepare,
What Heaven ordains the wise with courage bear.
But say, why yonder on the lonely strands,
Unmindful of her son, Anticlea stands?
Why to the ground she bends her downcast eye?
Why is she silent, while her son is nigh?
The latent cause, O sacred seer, reveal!’

“‘Nor this (replies the seer) will I conceal.
Know, to the spectres that thy beverage taste,
The scenes of life recur, and actions past:
They, seal’d with truth, return the sure reply;
The rest, repell’d, a train oblivious fly.’

“The phantom-prophet ceased, and sunk from sight,
To the black palace of eternal night.

“Still in the dark abodes of death I stood,
When near Anticlea moved, and drank the blood.
Straight all the mother in her soul awakes,
And, owning her Ulysses, thus she speaks;
‘Comest thou, my son, alive, to realms beneath,
The dolesome realms of darkness and of death!
Comest thou alive from pure, ethereal day?
Dire is the region, dismal is the way!
Here lakes profound, there floods oppose their waves,
There the wide sea with all his billows raves!
Or (since to dust proud Troy submits her towers)
Comest thou a wanderer from the Phrygian shores?
Or say, since honour call’d thee to the field,
Hast thou thy Ithaca, thy bride, beheld?’

“‘Source of my life,’ I cried, ‘from earth I fly
To seek Tiresias in the nether sky,
To learn my doom; for, toss’d from woe to woe,
In every land Ulysses finds a foe:
Nor have these eyes beheld my native shores,
Since in the dust proud Troy submits her towers.

“‘But, when thy soul from her sweet mansion fled,
Say, what distemper gave thee to the dead?
Has life’s fair lamp declined by slow decays,
Or swift expired it in a sudden blaze?
Say, if my sire, good old Laertes, lives?
If yet Telemachus, my son, survives?
Say, by his rule is my dominion awed,
Or crush’d by traitors with an iron rod?
Say, if my spouse maintains her royal trust;
Though tempted, chaste, and obstinately just?
Or if no more her absent lord she wails,
But the false woman o’er the wife prevails?’

“Thus I, and thus the parent-shade returns:
‘Thee, ever thee, thy faithful consort mourns:
Whether the night descends or day prevails,
Thee she by night, and thee by day bewails.
Thee in Telemachus thy realm obeys;
In sacred groves celestial rites he pays,
And shares the banquet in superior state,
Graced with such honours as become the great
Thy sire in solitude foments his care:
The court is joyless, for thou art not there!
No costly carpets raise his hoary head,
No rich embroidery shines to grace his bed;
Even when keen winter freezes in the skies,
Rank’d with his slaves, on earth the monarch lies:
Deep are his sighs, his visage pale, his dress
The garb of woe and habit of distress.
And when the autumn takes his annual round,
The leafy honours scattering on the ground,
Regardless of his years, abroad he lies,
His bed the leaves, his canopy the skies.
Thus cares on cares his painful days consume,
And bow his age with sorrow to the tomb!

“‘For thee, my son, I wept my life away;
For thee through hell’s eternal dungeons stray:
Nor came my fate by lingering pains and slow,
Nor bent the silver-shafted queen her bow;
No dire disease bereaved me of my breath;
Thou, thou, my son, wert my disease and death;
Unkindly with my love my son conspired,
For thee I lived, for absent thee expired.’

“Thrice in my arms I strove her shade to bind,
Thrice through my arms she slipp’d like empty wind,
Or dreams, the vain illusions of the mind.
Wild with despair, I shed a copious tide
Of flowing tears, and thus with sighs replied:

“‘Fliest thou, loved shade, while I thus fondly mourn!
Turn to my arms, to my embraces turn!
Is it, ye powers that smile at human harms!
Too great a bliss to weep within her arms?
Or has hell’s queen an empty image sent,
That wretched I might e’en my joys lament?’

“‘O son of woe,’ the pensive shade rejoin’d;
‘O most inured to grief of all mankind!
‘Tis not the queen of hell who thee deceives;
All, all are such, when life the body leaves:
No more the substance of the man remains,
Nor bounds the blood along the purple veins:
These the funereal flames in atoms bear,
To wander with the wind in empty air:
While the impassive soul reluctant flies,
Like a vain dream, to these infernal skies.
But from the dark dominions speed the way,
And climb the steep ascent to upper day:
To thy chaste bride the wondrous story tell,
The woes, the horrors, and the laws of hell.’

“Thus while she spoke, in swarms hell’s empress brings
Daughters and wives of heroes and of kings;
Thick and more thick they gather round the blood,
Ghost thronged on ghost (a dire assembly) stood!
Dauntless my sword I seize: the airy crew,
Swift as it flash’d along the gloom, withdrew;
Then shade to shade in mutual forms succeeds,
Her race recounts, and their illustrious deeds.

“Tyro began, whom great Salmoneus bred;
The royal partner of famed Cretheus’ bed.
For fair Enipeus, as from fruitful urns
He pours his watery store, the virgin burns;
Smooth flows the gentle stream with wanton pride,
And in soft mazes rolls a silver tide.
As on his banks the maid enamour’d roves,
The monarch of the deep beholds and loves;
In her Enipeus’ form and borrow’d charms
The amorous god descends into her arms:
Around, a spacious arch of waves he throws,
And high in air the liquid mountain rose;
Thus in surrounding floods conceal’d, he proves
The pleasing transport, and completes his loves.
Then, softly sighing, he the fair address’d,
And as he spoke her tender hand he press’d.
‘Hail, happy nymph! no vulgar births are owed
To the prolific raptures of a god:
Lo! when nine times the moon renews her horn,
Two brother heroes shall from thee be born;
Thy early care the future worthies claim,
To point them to the arduous paths of fame;
But in thy breast the important truth conceal,
Nor dare the secret of a god reveal:
For know, thou Neptune view’st! and at my nod
Earth trembles, and the waves confess their god.’

“He added not, but mounting spurn’d the plain,
Then plunged into the chambers of the main,

“Now in the time’s full process forth she brings
Jove’s dread vicegerents in two future kings;
O’er proud Iolcos Pelias stretch’d his reign,
And godlike Neleus ruled the Pylian plain:
Then, fruitful, to her Cretheus’ royal bed
She gallant Pheres and famed Aeson bred;
From the same fountain Amythaon rose,
Pleased with the din of scar; and noble shout of foes.

“There moved Antiope, with haughty charms,
Who bless’d the almighty Thunderer in her arms:
Hence sprung Amphion, hence brave Zethus came,
Founders of Thebes, and men of mighty name;
Though bold in open field, they yet surround
The town with walls, and mound inject on mound;
Here ramparts stood, there towers rose high in air,
And here through seven wide portals rush’d the war.

“There with soft step the fair Alcmena trod,
Who bore Alcides to the thundering god:
And Megara, who charm’d the son of Jove,
And soften’d his stern soul to tender love.

“Sullen and sour, with discontented mien,
Jocasta frown’d, the incestuous Theban queen;
With her own son she join’d in nuptial bands,
Though father’s blood imbrued his murderous hands
The gods and men the dire offence detest,
The gods with all their furies rend his breast;
In lofty Thebes he wore the imperial crown,
A pompous wretch! accursed upon a throne.
The wife self-murder’d from a beam depends,
And her foul soul to blackest hell descends;
Thence to her son the choicest plagues she brings,
And the fiends haunt him with a thousand stings.

“And now the beauteous Chloris I descry,
A lovely shade, Amphion’s youngest joy!
With gifts unnumber’d Neleus sought her arms,
Nor paid too dearly for unequall’d charms;
Great in Orchomenos, in Pylos great,
He sway’d the sceptre with imperial state.
Three gallant sons the joyful monarch told,
Sage Nestor, Periclimenus the bold,
And Chromius last; but of the softer race,
One nymph alone, a myracle of grace.
Kings on their thrones for lovely Pero burn;
The sire denies, and kings rejected mourn.
To him alone the beauteous prize he yields,
Whose arm should ravish from Phylacian fields
The herds of Iphyclus, detain’d in wrong;
Wild, furious herds, unconquerably strong!
This dares a seer, but nought the seer prevails,
In beauty’s cause illustriously he fails;
Twelve moons the foe the captive youth detains
In painful dungeons, and coercive chains;
The foe at last from durance where he lay,
His heart revering, give him back to day;
Won by prophetic knowledge, to fulfil
The steadfast purpose of the Almighty will.

“With graceful port advancing now I spied,
Leda the fair, the godlike Tyndar’s bride:
Hence Pollux sprung, who wields the furious sway
The deathful gauntlet, matchless in the fray;
And Castor, glorious on the embattled plain,
Curbs the proud steeds, reluctant to the rein:
By turns they visit this ethereal sky,
And live alternate, and alternate die:
In hell beneath, on earth, in heaven above,
Reign the twin-gods, the favourite sons of Jove.

“There Ephimedia trod the gloomy plain,
Who charm’d the monarch of the boundless main:
Hence Ephialtes, hence stern Otus sprung,
More fierce than giants, more than giants strong;
The earth o’erburden’d groan’d beneath their weight,
None but Orion e’er surpassed their height:
The wondrous youths had scarce nine winters told,
When high in air, tremendous to behold,
Nine ells aloft they rear’d their towering head,
And full nine cubits broad their shoulders spread.
Proud of their strength, and more than mortal size,
The gods they challenge, and affect the skies:
Heaved on Olympus tottering Ossa stood;
On Ossa, Pelion nods with all his wood.
Such were they youths! had they to manhood grown
Almighty Jove had trembled on his throne,
But ere the harvest of the beard began
To bristle on the chin, and promise man,
His shafts Apollo aim’d; at once they sound,
And stretch the giant monsters o’er the ground.

“There mournful Phaedra with sad Procris moves,
Both beauteous shades, both hapless in their loves;
And near them walk’d with solemn pace and slow,
Sad Adriadne, partner of their woe:
The royal Minos Ariadne bred,
She Theseus loved, from Crete with Theseus fled:
Swift to the Dian isle the hero flies,
And towards his Athens bears the lovely prize;
There Bacchus with fierce rage Diana fires,
The goddess aims her shaft, the nymph expires.

“There Clymene and Mera I behold,
There Eriphyle weeps, who loosely sold
Her lord, her honour, for the lust of gold.
But should I all recount, the night would fail,
Unequal to the melancholy tale:
And all-composing rest my nature craves,
Here in the court, or yonder on the waves;
In you I trust, and in the heavenly powers,
To land Ulysses on his native shores.”

He ceased; but left so charming on their ear
His voice, that listening still they seem’d to hear,
Till, rising up, Arete silence broke,
Stretch’d out her snowy hand, and thus she spoke:

“What wondrous man heaven sends us in our guest;
Through all his woes the hero shines confess’d;
His comely port, his ample frame express
A manly air, majestic in distress.
He, as my guest, is my peculiar care:
You share the pleasure, then in bounty share
To worth in misery a reverence pay,
And with a generous hand reward his stay;
For since kind heaven with wealth our realm has bless’d,
Give it to heaven by aiding the distress’d.”

Then sage Echeneus, whose grave reverend brow
The hand of time had silvered o’er with snow,
Mature in wisdom rose: “Your words (he cries)
Demand obedience, for your words are wise.
But let our king direct the glorious way
To generous acts; our part is to obey.”

“While life informs these limbs (the king replied),
Well to deserve, be all my cares employed:
But here this night the royal guest detain,
Till the sun flames along the ethereal plain.
Be it my task to send with ample stores
The stranger from our hospitable shores:
Tread you my steps! ’Tis mine to lead the race,
The first in glory, as the first in place.”

To whom the prince: “This night with joy I stay
O monarch great in virtue as in sway!
If thou the circling year my stay control,
To raise a bounty noble as thy soul;
The circling year I wait, with ampler stores
And fitter pomp to hail my native shores:
Then by my realms due homage would be paid;
For wealthy kings are loyally obeyed!”

“O king! for such thou art, and sure thy blood
Through veins (he cried) of royal fathers flow’d:
Unlike those vagrants who on falsehood live,
Skill’d in smooth tales, and artful to deceive;
Thy better soul abhors the liar’s part,
Wise is thy voice, and noble is thy heart.
Thy words like music every breast control,
Steal through the ear, and win upon the soul;
Soft, as some song divine, thy story flows,
Nor better could the Muse record thy woes.

“But say, upon the dark and dismal coast,
Saw’st thou the worthies of the Grecian host?
The godlike leaders who, in battle slain,
Fell before Troy, and nobly press’d the plain?
And lo! a length of night behind remains,
The evening stars still mount the ethereal plains.
Thy tale with raptures I could hear thee tell,
Thy woes on earth, the wondrous scenes in hell,
Till in the vault of heaven the stars decay.
And the sky reddens with the rising day.”

“O worthy of the power the gods assign’d
(Ulysses thus replies), a king in mind:
Since yet the early hour of night allows
Time for discourse, and time for soft repose,
If scenes of misery can entertain,
Woes I unfold, of woes a dismal train.
Prepare to hear of murder and of blood;
Of godlike heroes who uninjured stood
Amidst a war of spears in foreign lands,
Yet bled at home, and bled by female hands.

“Now summon’d Proserpine to hell’s black hall
The heroine shades: they vanish’d at her call.
When lo! advanced the forms of heroes slain
By stern AEgysthus, a majestic train:
And, high above the rest Atrides press’d the plain.
He quaff’d the gore; and straight his soldier knew,
And from his eyes pour’d down the tender dew:
His arms he stretch’d; his arms the touch deceive,
Nor in the fond embrace, embraces give:
His substance vanish’d, and his strength decay’d,
Now all Atrides is an empty shade.

“Moved at the sight, I for a apace resign’d
To soft affliction all my manly mind;
At last with tears: ‘O what relentless doom,
Imperial phantom, bow’d thee to the tomb?
Say while the sea, and while the tempest raves,
Has Fate oppress’d thee in the roaring waves,
Or nobly seized thee in the dire alarms
Of war and slaughter, and the clash of arms?’

“The ghost returns: ‘O chief of human kind
For active courage and a patient mind;
Nor while the sea, nor while the tempest raves
Has Fate oppress’d me on the roaring waves!
Nor nobly seized me in the dire alarms
Of war and slaughter, and the clash of arms
Stabb’d by a murderous hand Atrides died,
A foul adulterer, and a faithless bride;
E’en in my mirth, and at the friendly feast,
O’er the full bowl, the traitor stabb’d his guest;
Thus by the gory arm of slaughter falls
The stately ox, and bleeds within the stalls.
But not with me the direful murder ends,
These, these expired! their crime, they were my friends:
Thick as the boars, which some luxurious lord
Kills for the feast, to crown the nuptial board.
When war has thunder’d with its loudest storms,
Death thou hast seen in all her ghastly forms:
In duel met her on the listed ground,
When hand to hand they wound return for wound;
But never have the eyes astonish’d view’d
So vile a deed, so dire a scene of blood.
E’en in the flow of joy, when now the bowl
Glows in our veins, and opens every soul,
We groan, we faint; with blood the doom is dyed.
And o’er the pavement floats the dreadful tide—
Her breast all gore, with lamentable cries,
The bleeding innocent Cassandra dies!
Then though pale death froze cold in every vein,
My sword I strive to wield, but strive in vain;
Nor did my traitress wife these eyelids close,
Or decently in death my limbs compose.
O woman, woman, when to ill thy mind
Is bent, all hell contains no fouler fiend:
And such was mine! who basely plunged her sword
Through the fond bosom where she reign’d adored!
Alas! I hoped the toils of war o’ercome,
To meet soft quiet and repose at home;
Delusive hope! O wife, thy deeds disgrace
The perjured sex, and blacken all the race;
And should posterity one virtuous find,
Name Clytemnestra, they will curse the kind.’

“Oh injured shade (I cried) what mighty woes
To thy imperial race from woman rose!
By woman here thou tread’st this mournful strand,
And Greece by woman lies a desert land.’

“‘Warn’d by my ills beware, (the shade replies,)
Nor trust the sex that is so rarely wise;
When earnest to explore thy secret breast,
Unfold some trifle, but conceal the rest.
But in thy consort cease to fear a foe,
For thee she feels sincerity of woe;
When Troy first bled beneath the Grecian arms,
She shone unrivall’d with a blaze of charms;
Thy infant son her fragrant bosom press’d,
Hung at her knee, or wanton’d at her breast;
But now the years a numerous train have ran;
The blooming boy is ripen’d into man;
Thy eyes shall see him burn with noble fire,
The sire shall bless his son, the son his sire;
But my Orestes never met these eyes,
Without one look the murder’d father dies;
Then from a wretched friend this wisdom learn,
E’en to thy queen disguised, unknown, return;
For since of womankind so few are just,
Think all are false, nor e’en the faithful trust.

“‘But, say, resides my son in royal port,
In rich Orchomenos, or Sparta’s court?
Or say in Pyle? for yet he views the light,
Nor glides a phantom through the realms of night.’

“Then I: ‘Thy suit is vain, nor can I say
If yet he breathes in realms of cheerful day;
Or pale or wan beholds these nether skies;
Truth I revere; for wisdom never lies.’

“Thus in a tide of tears our sorrows flow,
And add new horror to the realms of woe;
Till side by side along the dreary coast
Advanced Achilles’ and Patroclus’ ghost,
A friendly pair! near these the Pylian stray’d,
And towering Ajax, an illustrious shade!
War was his joy, and pleased with loud alarms,
None but Pelides brighter shone in arms.

“Through the thick gloom his friend Achilles knew,
And as he speaks the tears descend in dew.

“‘Comest thou alive to view the Stygian bounds,
Where the wan spectres walk eternal rounds;
Nor fear’st the dark and dismal waste to tread,
Throng’d with pale ghosts, familiar with the dead?’

“To whom with sighs: ‘I pass these dreadful gates
To seek the Theban, and consult the Fates;
For still, distress’d, I rove from coast to coast,
Lost to my friends, and to my country lost.
But sure the eye of Time beholds no name
So bless’d as thine in all the rolls of fame;
Alive we hail’d thee with our guardian gods,
And dead thou rulest a king in these abodes.’

“‘Talk not of ruling in this dolorous gloom,
Nor think vain words (he cried) can ease my doom.
Rather I’d choose laboriously to bear
A weight of woes, and breathe the vital air,
A slave to some poor hind that toils for bread,
Than reign the sceptred monarch of the dead.
But say, if in my steps my son proceeds,
And emulates his godlike father’s deeds?
If at the clash of arms, and shout of foes,
Swells his bold heart, his bosom nobly glows?
Say if my sire, the reverend Peleus, reigns,
Great in his Phthia, and his throne maintains;
Or, weak and old, my youthful arm demands,
To fix the sceptre steadfast in his hands?
O might the lamp of life rekindled burn,
And death release me from the silent urn!
This arm, that thunder’d o’er the Phrygian plain,
And swell’d the ground with mountains of the slain,
Should vindicate my injured father’s fame,
Crush the proud rebel, and assert his claim.’

“‘Illustrious shade (I cried), of Peleus’ fates
No circumstance the voice of Fame relates:
But hear with pleased attention the renown,
The wars and wisdom of thy gallant son.
With me from Scyros to the field of fame
Radiant in arms the blooming hero came.
When Greece assembled all her hundred states,
To ripen counsels, and decide debates,
Heavens! how he charm’d us with a flow of sense,
And won the heart with manly eloquence!
He first was seen of all the peers to rise,
The third in wisdom, where they all were wise!
But when, to try the fortune of the day,
Host moved toward host in terrible array,
Before the van, impatient for the fight,
With martial port he strode, and stern delight:
Heaps strew’d on heaps beneath his falchion groan’d,
And monuments of dead deform’d the ground.
The time would fail should I in order tell
What foes were vanquish’d, and what numbers fell:
How, lost through love, Eurypylus was slain,
And round him bled his bold Cetaean train.
To Troy no hero came of nobler line,
Or if of nobler, Memnon, it was thine.

“When Ilion in the horse received her doom,
And unseen armies ambush’d in its womb,
Greece gave her latent warriors to my care,
’Twas mine on Troy to pour the imprison’d war:
Then when the boldest bosom beat with fear,
When the stern eyes of heroes dropp’d a tear,
Fierce in his look his ardent valour glow’d,
Flush’d in his cheek, or sallied in his blood;
Indignant in the dark recess he stands,
Pants for the battle, and the war demands:
His voice breathed death, and with a martial air
He grasp’d his sword, and shook his glittering spear.
And when the gods our arms with conquest crown’d,
When Troy’s proud bulwarks smoked upon the ground,
Greece, to reward her soldier’s gallant toils,
Heap’d high his navy with unnumber’d spoils.

“Thus great in glory, from the din of war
Safe he return’d, without one hostile scar;
Though spears in iron tempests rain’d around,
Yet innocent they play’d, and guiltless of a wound.’

“While yet I spoke, the shade with transport glow’d,
Rose in his majesty, and nobler trod;
With haughty stalk he sought the distant glades
Of warrior kings, and join’d the illustrious shades.

“Now without number ghost by ghost arose,
All wailing with unutterable woes.
Alone, apart, in discontented mood,
A gloomy shade the sullen Ajax stood;
For ever sad, with proud disdain he pined,
And the lost arms for ever stung his mind;
Though to the contest Thetis gave the laws,
And Pallas, by the Trojans, judged the cause.
O why was I victorious in the strife?
O dear bought honour with so brave a life!
With him the strength of war, the soldier’s pride,
Our second hope to great Achilles, died!
Touch’d at the sight from tears I scarce refrain,
And tender sorrow thrills in every vein;
Pensive and sad I stand, at length accost
With accents mild the inexorable ghost:
‘Still burns thy rage? and can brave souls resent
E’en after death? Relent, great shade, relent!
Perish those arms which by the gods’ decree
Accursed our army with the loss of thee!
With thee we fall; Greece wept thy hapless fates,
And shook astonish’d through her hundred states;
Not more, when great Achilles press’d the ground,
And breathed his manly spirit through the wound.
O deem thy fall not owed to man’s decree,
Jove hated Greece, and punish’d Greece in thee!
Turn then; oh peaceful turn, thy wrath control,
And calm the raging tempest of thy soul.’

“While yet I speak, the shade disdains to stay,
In silence turns, and sullen stalks away.

“Touch’d at his sour retreat, through deepest night,
Through hell’s black bounds I had pursued his flight,
And forced the stubborn spectre to reply;
But wondrous visions drew my curious eye.
High on a throne, tremendous to behold,
Stern Minos waves a mace of burnish’d gold;
Around ten thousand thousand spectres stand
Through the wide dome of Dis, a trembling band
Still as they plead, the fatal lots he rolls,
Absolves the just, and dooms the guilty souls.

“The huge Orion, of portentous size,
Swift through the gloom a giant-hunter flies:
A ponderous mace of brass with direful sway
Aloft he whirls, to crush the savage prey!
Stern beasts in trains that by his truncheon fell,
Now grisly forms, shoot o’er the lawns of hell.

“There Tityus large and long, in fetters bound,
O’erspreads nine acres of infernal ground;
Two ravenous vultures, furious for their food,
Scream o’er the fiend, and riot in his blood,
Incessant gore the liver in his breast,
The immortal liver grows, and gives the immortal feast.
For as o’er Panope’s enamell’d plains
Latona journey’d to the Pythian fanes,
With haughty love the audacious monster strove
To force the goddess, and to rival Jove.

“There Tantalus along the Stygian bounds
Pours out deep groans (with groans all hell resounds);
E’en in the circling floods refreshment craves,
And pines with thirst amidst a sea of waves;
When to the water he his lip applies,
Back from his lip the treacherous water flies.
Above, beneath, around his hapless head,
Trees of all kinds delicious fruitage spread;
There figs, sky-dyed, a purple hue disclose,
Green looks the olive, the pomegranate glows.
There dangling pears exalting scents unfold.
And yellow apples ripen into gold;
The fruit he strives to seize; but blasts arise,
Toss it on high, and whirl it to the skies.

“I turn’d my eye, and as I turn’d survey’d
A mournful vision! the Sisyphian shade;
With many a weary step, and many a groan,
Up the high hill he heaves a huge round stone;
The huge round stone, resulting with a bound,
Thunders impetuous down, and smokes along the ground.
Again the restless orb his toil renews,
Dust mounts in clouds, and sweat descends in dews.

“Now I the strength of Hercules behold,
A towering spectre of gigantic mould,
A shadowy form! for high in heaven’s abodes
Himself resides, a god among the gods;
There in the bright assemblies of the skies.
He nectar quaffs, and Hebe crowns his joys.
Here hovering ghosts, like fowl, his shade surround,
And clang their pinions with terrific sound;
Gloomy as night he stands, in act to throw
The aërial arrow from the twanging bow.
Around his breast a wondrous zone is roll’d,
Where woodland monsters grin in fretted gold;
There sullen lions sternly seem to roar,
The bear to growl to foam the tusky boar;
There war and havoc and destruction stood,
And vengeful murder red with human blood.
Thus terribly adorned the figures shine,
Inimitably wrought with skill divine.
The mighty good advanced with awful look,
And, turning his grim visage, sternly spoke:

“‘O exercise in grief! by arts refined;
O taught to bear the wrongs of base mankind!
Such, such was I! Still toss’d from care to care,
While in your world I drew the vital air!
E’en I, who from the Lord of Thunders rose,
Bore toils and dangers, and a weight of woes;
To a base monarch still a slave confined,
(The hardest bondage to a generous mind!)
Down to these worlds I trod the dismal way,
And dragg’d the three-mouth’d dog to upper day
E’en hell I conquer’d, through the friendly aid
Of Maia’s offspring, and the martial maid.

“Thus he, nor deign’d for our reply to stay,
But, turning, stalk’d with giant-strides away.

“Curious to view the kings of ancient days,
The mighty dead that live in endless praise,
Resolved I stand; and haply had survey’d
The godlike Theseus, and Pirithous’ shade;
But swarms of spectres rose from deepest hell,
With bloodless visage, and with hideous yell.
They scream, they shriek; and groans and dismal sounds
Stun my scared ears, and pierce hell’s utmost bounds.
No more my heart the dismal din sustains,
And my cold blood hangs shivering in my veins;
Lest Gorgon, rising from the infernal lakes,
With horrors arm’d, and curls of hissing snakes,
Should fix me stiffen’d at the monstrous sight,
A stony image, in eternal night!
Straight from the direful coast to purer air
I speed my flight, and to my mates repair.
My mates ascend the ship; they strike their oars;
The mountains lessen, and retreat the shores;
Swift o’er the waves we fly; the freshening gales
Sing through the shrouds, and stretch the swelling sails.”






“Thus o’er the rolling surge the vessel flies,
Till from the waves the Ææan hills arise.
Here the gay Morn resides in radiant bowers,
Here keeps her revels with the dancing Hours;
Here Phœbus, rising in the ethereal way,
Through heaven’s bright portals pours the beamy day.
At once we fix our halsers on the land.
At once descend, and press the desert sand:
There, worn and wasted, lose our cares in sleep,
To the hoarse murmurs of the rolling deep.

“Soon as the morn restored the day, we paid
Sepulchral honours to Elpenor’s shade.
Now by the axe the rushing forest bends,
And the huge pile along the shore ascends.
Around we stand, a melancholy train,
And a loud groan re-echoes from the main.
Fierce o’er the pyre, by fanning breezes spread,
The hungry flames devour the silent dead.
A rising tomb, the silent dead to grace,
Fast by the roarings of the main we place;
The rising tomb a lofty column bore,
And high above it rose the tapering oar.

“Meantime the goddess our return survey’d
From the pale ghosts and hell’s tremendous shade.
Swift she descends: a train of nymphs divine
Bear the rich viands and the generous wine:
In act to speak the power of magic stands,
And graceful thus accosts the listening bands;

“‘O sons of woe? decreed by adverse fates
Alive to pass through hell’s eternal gates!
All, soon or late, are doom’d that path to tread;
More wretched you! twice number’d with the dead!
This day adjourn your cares, exalt your souls,
Indulge the taste, and drain the sparkling bowls;
And when the morn unveils her saffron ray,
Spread your broad sails, and plough the liquid way:
Lo, I this night, your faithful guide, explain
Your woes by land, your dangers on the main.’

“The goddess spoke. In feasts we waste the day,
Till Phœbus downward plunged his burning ray;
Then sable night ascends, and balmy rest
Seals every eye, and calms the troubled breast.
Then curious she commands me to relate
The dreadful scenes of Pluto’s dreary state.
She sat in silence while the tale I tell,
The wondrous visions and the laws of hell.

“Then thus: ‘The lot of man the gods dispose;
These ills are past: now hear thy future woes
O prince attend; some favouring power be kind,
And print the important story on thy mind!

“‘Next, where the Sirens dwell, you plough the seas;
Their song is death, and makes destruction please.
Unblest the man, whom music wins to stay
Nigh the cursed shore and listen to the lay.
No more that wretch shall view the joys of life
His blooming offspring, or his beauteous wife!
In verdant meads they sport; and wide around
Lie human bones that whiten all the ground:
The ground polluted floats with human gore,
And human carnage taints the dreadful shore
Fly swift the dangerous coast: let every ear
Be stopp’d against the song! ’tis death to hear!
Firm to the mast with chains thyself be bound,
Nor trust thy virtue to the enchanting sound.
If, mad with transport, freedom thou demand,
Be every fetter strain’d, and added band to band.

“‘These seas o’erpass’d, be wise! but I refrain
To mark distinct thy voyage o’er the main:
New horrors rise! let prudence be thy guide,
And guard thy various passage through the tide.

“‘High o’er the main two rocks exalt their brow,’
The boiling billows thundering roll below;
Through the vast waves the dreadful wonders move,
Hence named Erratic by the gods above.
No bird of air, no dove of swiftest wing,
That bears ambrosia to the ethereal king,
Shuns the dire rocks: in vain she cuts the skies;
The dire rocks meet, and crush her as she flies:
Not the fleet bark, when prosperous breezes play,
Ploughs o’er that roaring surge its desperate way;
O’erwhelm’d it sinks: while round a smoke expires,
And the waves flashing seem to burn with fires.
Scarce the famed Argo pass’d these raging floods,
The sacred Argo, fill’d with demigods!
E’en she had sunk, but Jove’s imperial bride
Wing’d her fleet sail, and push’d her o’er the tide.

“‘High in the air the rock its summit shrouds
In brooding tempests, and in rolling clouds;
Loud storms around, and mists eternal rise,
Beat its bleak brow, and intercept the skies.
When all the broad expansion, bright with day,
Glows with the autumnal or the summer ray,
The summer and the autumn glow in vain,
The sky for ever lowers, for ever clouds remain.
Impervious to the step of man it stands,
Though borne by twenty feet, though arm’d with twenty hands;
Smooth as the polish of the mirror rise
The slippery sides, and shoot into the skies.
Full in the centre of this rock display’d,
A yawning cavern casts a dreadful shade:
Nor the fleet arrow from the twanging bow,
Sent with full force, could reach the depth below.
Wide to the west the horrid gulf extends,
And the dire passage down to hell descends.
O fly the dreadful sight! expand thy sails,
Ply the strong oar, and catch the nimble gales;
Here Scylla bellows from the dire abodes,
Tremendous pest, abhorr’d by man and gods!
Hideous her voice, and with less terrors roar
The whelps of lions in the midnight hour.
Twelve feet, deform’d and foul, the fiend dispreads;
Six horrid necks she rears, and six terrific heads;
Her jaws grin dreadful with three rows of teeth;
Jaggy they stand, the gaping den of death;
Her parts obscene the raging billows hide;
Her bosom terribly o’erlooks the tide.
When stung with hunger she embroils the flood,
The sea-dog and the dolphin are her food;
She makes the huge leviathan her prey,
And all the monsters of the watery way;
The swiftest racer of the azure plain
Here fills her sails, and spreads her oars in vain;
Fell Scylla rises, in her fury roars,
At once six mouths expands, at once six men devours.

“‘Close by, a rock of less enormous height
Breaks the wild waves, and forms a dangerous strait;
Full on its crown a fig’s green branches rise,
And shoot a leafy forest to the skies;
Beneath, Charybdis holds her boisterous reign
’Midst roaring whirlpools, and absorbs the main;
Thrice in her gulfs the boiling seas subside,
Thrice in dire thunders she refunds the tide.
Oh, if thy vessel plough the direful waves,
When seas retreating roar within her caves,
Ye perish all! though he who rules the main
Lends his strong aid, his aid he lends in vain.
Ah, shun the horrid gulf! by Scylla fly.
’Tis better six to lose, than all to die.’

“I then: ‘O nymph propitious to my prayer,
Goddess divine, my guardian power, declare,
Is the foul fiend from human vengeance freed?
Or, if I rise in arms, can Scylla bleed?’

“Then she: ‘O worn by toils, O broke in fight,
Still are new toils and war thy dire delight?
Will martial flames for ever fire thy mind,
And never, never be to Heaven resign’d?
How vain thy efforts to avenge the wrong!
Deathless the pest! impenetrably strong!
Furious and fell, tremendous to behold!
E’en with a look she withers all the bold!
She mocks the weak attempts of human might;
Oh, fly her rage! thy conquest is thy flight.
If but to seize thy arms thou make delay,
Again thy fury vindicates her prey;
Her six mouths yawn, and six are snatch’d away.
From her foul wound Crataeis gave to air
This dreadful pest! To her direct thy prayer,
To curb the monster in her dire abodes,
And guard thee through the tumult of the floods.
Thence to Trinacria’s shore you bend your way,
Where graze thy herds, illustrious source of day!
Seven herds, seven flocks enrich the sacred plains,
Each herd, each flock full fifty heads contains;
The wondrous kind a length of age survey,
By breed increase not, nor by death decay.
Two sister goddesses possess the plain,
The constant guardian of the woolly train;
Lampetie fair, and Phaethusa young,
From Phœbus and the bright Neæra sprung;
Here, watchful o’er the flocks, in shady bowers
And flowery meads, they waste the joyous hours.
Rob not the gods! and so propitious gales
Attend thy voyage, and impel thy sails;
But if thy impious hands the flocks destroy,
The gods, the gods avenge it, and ye die!
’Tis thine alone (thy friends and navy lost)
Through tedious toils to view thy native coast.’

She ceased: and now arose the morning ray;
Swift to her dome the goddess held her way.
Then to my mates I measured back the plain,
Climb’d the tall bark, and rush’d into the main;
Then, bending to the stroke, their oars they drew
To their broad breasts, and swift the galley flew.
Up sprung a brisker breeze; with freshening gales
The friendly goddess stretch’d the swelling sails;
We drop our oars; at ease the pilot guides;
The vessel light along the level glides.
When, rising sad and slow, with pensive look,
Thus to the melancholy train I spoke:

“‘O friends, oh ever partners of my woes,
Attend while I what Heaven foredooms disclose.
Hear all! Fate hangs o’er all; on you it lies
To live or perish! to be safe, be wise!

“‘In flowery meads the sportive Sirens play,
Touch the soft lyre, and tune the vocal lay;
Me, me alone, with fetters firmly bound,
The gods allow to hear the dangerous sound.
Hear and obey; if freedom I demand,
Be every fetter strain’d, be added band to band.’

“While yet I speak the winged galley flies,
And lo! the Siren shores like mists arise.
Sunk were at once the winds; the air above,
And waves below, at once forgot to move;
Some demon calm’d the air and smooth’d the deep,
Hush’d the loud winds, and charm’d the waves to sleep.
Now every sail we furl, each oar we ply;
Lash’d by the stroke, the frothy waters fly.
The ductile wax with busy hands I mould,
And cleft in fragments, and the fragments roll’d;
The aërial region now grew warm with day,
The wax dissolved beneath the burning ray;
Then every ear I barr’d against the strain,
And from access of frenzy lock’d the brain.
Now round the masts my mates the fetters roll’d,
And bound me limb by limb with fold on fold.
Then bending to the stroke, the active train
Plunge all at once their oars, and cleave the main.

“While to the shore the rapid vessel flies,
Our swift approach the Siren choir descries;
Celestial music warbles from their tongue,
And thus the sweet deluders tune the song:

“‘Oh stay, O pride of Greece! Ulysses, stay!
Oh cease thy course, and listen to our lay!
Blest is the man ordain’d our voice to hear,
The song instructs the soul, and charms the ear.
Approach! thy soul shall into raptures rise!
Approach! and learn new wisdom from the wise!
We know whate’er the kings of mighty name
Achieved at Ilion in the field of fame;
Whate’er beneath the sun’s bright journey lies.
Oh stay, and learn new wisdom from the wise!’

“Thus the sweet charmers warbled o’er the main;
My soul takes wing to meet the heavenly strain;
I give the sign, and struggle to be free;
Swift row my mates, and shoot along the sea;
New chains they add, and rapid urge the way,
Till, dying off, the distant sounds decay;
Then scudding swiftly from the dangerous ground,
The deafen’d ear unlock’d, the chains unbound.

“Now all at once tremendous scenes unfold;
Thunder’d the deeps, the smoky billows roll’d!
Tumultuous waves embroil the bellowing flood,
All trembling, deafen’d, and aghast we stood!
No more the vessel plough’d the dreadful wave,
Fear seized the mighty, and unnerved the brave;
Each dropp’d his oar; but swift from man to man
With looks serene I turn’d, and thus began:
‘O friends! O often tried in adverse storms!
With ills familiar in more dreadful forms!
Deep in the dire Cyclopean den you lay,
Yet safe return’d—Ulysses led the way.
Learn courage hence, and in my care confide;
Lo! still the same Ulysses is your guide.
Attend my words! your oars incessant ply;
Strain every nerve, and bid the vessel fly.
If from yon jostling rocks and wavy war
Jove safety grants, he grants it to your care.
And thou, whose guiding hand directs our way,
Pilot, attentive listen and obey!
Bear wide thy course, nor plough those angry waves
Where rolls yon smoke, yon tumbling ocean raves;
Steer by the higher rock; lest whirl’d around
We sink, beneath the circling eddy drown’d.’
While yet I speak, at once their oars they seize,
Stretch to the stroke, and brush the working seas.
Cautious the name of Scylla I suppress’d;
That dreadful sound had chill’d the boldest breast.

“Meantime, forgetful of the voice divine,
All dreadful bright my limbs in armour shine;
High on the deck I take my dangerous stand,
Two glittering javelins lighten in my hand;
Prepared to whirl the whizzing spear I stay,
Till the fell fiend arise to seize her prey.
Around the dungeon, studious to behold
The hideous pest, my labouring eyes I roll’d;
In vain! the dismal dungeon, dark as night,
Veils the dire monster, and confounds the sight.

“Now through the rocks, appall’d with deep dismay,
We bend our course, and stem the desperate way;
Dire Scylla there a scene of horror forms,
And here Charybdis fills the deep with storms.
When the tide rushes from her rumbling caves,
The rough rock roars, tumultuous boil the waves;
They toss, they foam, a wild confusion raise,
Like waters bubbling o’er the fiery blaze;
Eternal mists obscure the aërial plain,
And high above the rock she spouts the main;
When in her gulfs the rushing sea subsides,
She drains the ocean with the refluent tides;
The rock re-bellows with a thundering sound;
Deep, wondrous deep, below appears the ground.

“Struck with despair, with trembling hearts we view’d
The yawning dungeon, and the tumbling flood;
When lo! fierce Scylla stoop’d to seize her prey,
Stretch’d her dire jaws, and swept six men away.
Chiefs of renown! loud-echoing shrieks arise;
I turn, and view them quivering in the skies;
They call, and aid with outstretch’d arms implore;
In vain they call! those arms are stretch’d no more.
As from some rock that overhangs the flood
The silent fisher casts the insidious food,
With fraudful care he waits the finny prize,
And sudden lifts it quivering to the skies:
So the foul monster lifts her prey on high,
So pant the wretches struggling in the sky;
In the wide dungeon she devours her food,
And the flesh trembles while she churns the blood.
Worn as I am with griefs, with care decay’d,
Never, I never scene so dire survey’d!
My shivering blood, congeal’d, forgot to flow;
Aghast I stood, a monument of woe!

“Now from the rocks the rapid vessel flies,
And the hoarse din like distant thunder dies;
To Sol’s bright isle our voyage we pursue,
And now the glittering mountains rise to view.
There, sacred to the radiant god of day,
Graze the fair herds, the flocks promiscuous stray:
Then suddenly was heard along the main
To low the ox, to bleat the woolly train.
Straight to my anxious thoughts the sound convey’d
The words of Circe and the Theban shade;
Warn’d by their awful voice these shores to shun,
With cautious fears oppress’d I thus begun:

“‘O friends! O ever exercised in care!
Hear Heaven’s commands, and reverence what ye hear!
To fly these shores the prescient Theban shade
And Circe warn! Oh be their voice obey’d;
Some mighty woe relentless Heaven forebodes:
Fly these dire regions, and revere the gods!’

“While yet I spoke, a sudden sorrow ran
Through every breast, and spread from man to man,
Till wrathful thus Eurylochus began:

“‘O cruel thou! some Fury sure has steel’d
That stubborn soul, by toil untaught to yield!
From sleep debarr’d, we sink from woes to woes:
And cruel, enviest thou a short repose?
Still must we restless rove, new seas explore,
The sun descending, and so near the shore?
And lo! the night begins her gloomy reign,
And doubles all the terrors of the main:
Oft in the dead of night loud winds arise,
Lash the wild surge, and bluster in the skies.
Oh, should the fierce south-west his rage display,
And toss with rising storms the watery way,
Though gods descend from heaven’s aërial plain
To lend us aid, the gods descend in vain.
Then while the night displays her awful shade,
Sweet time of slumber! be the night obey’d!
Haste ye to land! and when the morning ray
Sheds her bright beam, pursue the destined way.’
A sudden joy in every bosom rose:
So will’d some demon, minister of woes!

“To whom with grief: ‘O swift to be undone!
Constrain’d I act what wisdom bids me shun.
But yonder herbs and yonder flocks forbear;
Attest the heavens, and call the gods to hear:
Content, an innocent repast display,
By Circe given, and fly the dangerous prey.’

“Thus I: and while to shore the vessel flies,
With hands uplifted they attest the skies:
Then, where a fountain’s gurgling waters play,
They rush to land, and end in feasts the day:
They feed; they quaff; and now (their hunger fled)
Sigh for their friends devour’d, and mourn the dead;
Nor cease the tears till each in slumber shares
A sweet forgetfulness of human cares.
Now far the night advanced her gloomy reign,
And setting stars roll’d down the azure plain:
When at the voice of Jove wild whirlwinds rise,
And clouds and double darkness veil the skies;
The moon, the stars, the bright ethereal host
Seem as extinct, and all their splendours lost:
The furious tempest roars with dreadful sound:
Air thunders, rolls the ocean, groans the ground.
All night it raged: when morning rose to land
We haul’d our bark, and moor’d it on the strand,
Where in a beauteous grotto’s cool recess
Dance the green Nereids of the neighbouring seas.

“There while the wild winds whistled o’er the main,
Thus careful I address’d the listening train:

“‘O friends, be wise! nor dare the flocks destroy
Of these fair pastures: if ye touch, ye die.
Warn’d by the high command of Heaven, be awed:
Holy the flocks, and dreadful is the god!
That god who spreads the radiant beams of light,
And views wide earth and heaven’s unmeasured height.’

“And now the moon had run her monthly round,
The south-east blustering with a dreadful sound:
Unhurt the beeves, untouch’d the woolly train,
Low through the grove, or touch the flowery plain:
Then fail’d our food: then fish we make our prey,
Or fowl that screaming haunt the watery way.
Till now from sea or flood no succour found,
Famine and meagre want besieged us round.
Pensive and pale from grove to grove I stray’d,
From the loud storms to find a sylvan shade;
There o’er my hands the living wave I pour;
And Heaven and Heaven’s immortal thrones implore,
To calm the roarings of the stormy main,
And guide me peaceful to my realms again.
Then o’er my eyes the gods soft slumbers shed,
While thus Eurylochus arising said:

“‘O friends, a thousand ways frail mortals lead
To the cold tomb, and dreadful all to tread;
But dreadful most, when by a slow decay
Pale hunger wastes the manly strength away.
Why cease ye then to implore the powers above,
And offer hecatombs to thundering Jove?
Why seize ye not yon beeves, and fleecy prey?
Arise unanimous; arise and slay!
And if the gods ordain a safe return,
To Phœbus shrines shall rise, and altars burn.
But should the powers that o’er mankind preside
Decree to plunge us in the whelming tide,
Better to rush at once to shades below
Than linger life away, and nourish woe.’

“Thus he: the beeves around securely stray,
When swift to ruin they invade the prey;
They seize, they kill!—but for the rite divine.
The barley fail’d, and for libations wine.
Swift from the oak they strip the shady pride;
And verdant leaves the flowery cake supplied.

“With prayer they now address the ethereal train,
Slay the selected beeves, and flay the slain;
The thighs, with fat involved, divide with art,
Strew’d o’er with morsels cut from every part.
Water, instead of wine, is brought in urns,
And pour’d profanely as the victim burns.
The thighs thus offer’d, and the entrails dress’d,
They roast the fragments, and prepare the feast.

“‘Twas then soft slumber fled my troubled brain;
Back to the bark I speed along the main.
When lo! an odour from the feast exhales,
Spreads o’er the coast and scents the tainted gales;
A chilly fear congeal’d my vital blood,
And thus, obtesting Heaven, I mourn’d aloud;

“‘O sire of men and gods, immortal Jove!
O all ye blissful powers that reign above!
Why were my cares beguiled in short repose?
O fatal slumber, paid with lasting woes!
A deed so dreadful all the gods alarms,
Vengeance is on the wing, and Heaven in arms!’

“Meantime Lampetie mounts the aërial way,
And kindles into rage the god of day;

“‘Vengeance, ye powers (he cries), and then whose hand
Aims the red bolt, and hurls the writhen brand!
Slain are those herds which I with pride survey,
When through the ports of heaven I pour the day,
Or deep in ocean plunge the burning ray.
Vengeance, ye gods! or I the skies forego,
And bear the lamp of heaven to shades below.’

“To whom the thundering Power: ‘O source of day
Whose radiant lamp adorns the azure way,
Still may thy beams through heaven’s bright portal rise,
The joy of earth, the glory of the skies:
Lo! my red arm I bare, my thunders guide,
To dash the offenders in the whelming tide.’

“To fair Calypso, from the bright abodes,
Hermes convey’d these counsels of the gods.

“Meantime from man to man my tongue exclaims,
My wrath is kindled, and my soul in flames.
In vain! I view perform’d the direful deed,
Beeves, slain in heaps, along the ocean bleed.

“Now heaven gave signs of wrath: along the ground
Crept the raw hides, and with a bellowing sound
Roar’d the dead limbs; the burning entrails groan’d.
Six guilty days my wretched mates employ
In impious feasting, and unhallowed joy;
The seventh arose, and now the sire of gods
Rein’d the rough storms; and calm’d the tossing floods:
With speed the bark we climb; the spacious sails.
Loosed from the yards invite the impelling gales.
Past sight of shore, along the surge we bound,
And all above is sky, and ocean all around;
When lo! a murky cloud the thunderer forms
Full o’er our heads, and blackens heaven with storms.
Night dwells o’er all the deep: and now outflies
The gloomy west, and whistles in the skies.
The mountain-billows roar! the furious blast
Howls o’er the shroud, and rends it from the mast:
The mast gives way, and, crackling as it bends,
Tears up the deck; then all at once descends:
The pilot by the tumbling ruin slain,
Dash’d from the helm, falls headlong in the main.
Then Jove in anger bids his thunders roll,
And forky lightnings flash from pole to pole:
Fierce at our heads his deadly bolt he aims,
Red with uncommon wrath, and wrapp’d in flames:
Full on the bark it fell; now high, now low,
Toss’d and retoss’d, it reel’d beneath the blow;
At once into the main the crew it shook:
Sulphurous odours rose, and smouldering smoke.
Like fowl that haunt the floods, they sink, they rise,
Now lost, now seen, with shrieks and dreadful cries;
And strive to gain the bark, but Jove denies.
Firm at the helm I stand, when fierce the main
Rush’d with dire noise, and dash’d the sides in twain;
Again impetuous drove the furious blast,
Snapp’d the strong helm, and bore to sea the mast.
Firm to the mast with cords the helm I bind,
And ride aloft, to Providence resign’d,
Through tumbling billows and a war of wind.
“Now sunk the west, and now a southern breeze,
More dreadful than the tempest lash’d the seas;
For on the rocks it bore where Scylla raves,
And dire Charybdis rolls her thundering waves.
All night I drove; and at the dawn of day,
Fast by the rocks beheld the desperate way;
Just when the sea within her gulfs subsides,
And in the roaring whirlpools rush the tides,
Swift from the float I vaulted with a bound,
The lofty fig-tree seized, and clung around;
So to the beam the bat tenacious clings,
And pendent round it clasps his leather wings.
High in the air the tree its boughs display’d,
And o’er the dungeon cast a dreadful shade;
All unsustain’d between the wave and sky,
Beneath my feet the whirling billows fly.
What time the judge forsakes the noisy bar
To take repast, and stills the wordy war,
Charybdis, rumbling from her inmost caves,
The mast refunded on her refluent waves.
Swift from the tree, the floating mass to gain,
Sudden I dropp’d amidst the flashing main;
Once more undaunted on the ruin rode,
And oar’d with labouring arms along the flood.
Unseen I pass’d by Scylla’s dire abodes.
So Jove decreed (dread sire of men and gods).
Then nine long days I plow’d the calmer seas,
Heaved by the surge, and wafted by the breeze.
Weary and wet the Ogygian shores I gain,
When the tenth sun descended to the main.
There, in Calypso’s ever-fragrant bowers,
Refresh’d I lay, and joy beguiled the hours.
“My following fates to thee, O king, are known,
And the bright partner of thy royal throne.
Enough: in misery can words avail?
And what so tedious as a twice-told tale?”







He ceased; but left so pleasing on their ear
His voice, that listening still they seem’d to hear.
A pause of silence hush’d the shady rooms:
The grateful conference then the king resumes:

“Whatever toils the great Ulysses pass’d,
Beneath this happy roof they end at last;
No longer now from shore to shore to roam,
Smooth seas and gentle winds invite him home.
But hear me, princes! whom these walls inclose,
For whom my chanter sings: and goblet flows
With wine unmix’d (an honour due to age,
To cheer the grave, and warm the poet’s rage);
Though labour’d gold and many a dazzling vest
Lie heap’d already for our godlike guest;
Without new treasures let him not remove,
Large, and expressive of the public love:
Each peer a tripod, each a vase bestow,
A general tribute, which the state shall owe.”

This sentence pleased: then all their steps address’d
To separate mansions, and retired to rest.

Now did the rosy-finger’d morn arise,
And shed her sacred light along the skies.
Down to the haven and the ships in haste
They bore the treasures, and in safety placed.
The king himself the vases ranged with care;
Then bade his followers to the feast prepare.
A victim ox beneath the sacred hand
Of great Alcinous falls, and stains the sand.
To Jove the Eternal (power above all powers!
Who wings the winds, and darkens heaven with showers)
The flames ascend: till evening they prolong
The rites, more sacred made by heavenly song;
For in the midst, with public honours graced,
Thy lyre divine, Demodocus! was placed.
All, but Ulysses, heard with fix’d delight;
He sate, and eyed the sun, and wish’d the night;
Slow seem’d the sun to move, the hours to roll,
His native home deep-imaged in his soul.
As the tired ploughman, spent with stubborn toil,
Whose oxen long have torn the furrow’d soil,
Sees with delight the sun’s declining ray,
When home with feeble knees he bends his way
To late repast (the day’s hard labour done);
So to Ulysses welcome set the sun;
Then instant to Alcinous and the rest
(The Scherian states) he turn’d, and thus address’d:

“O thou, the first in merit and command!
And you the peers and princes of the land!
May every joy be yours! nor this the least,
When due libation shall have crown’d the feast,
Safe to my home to send your happy guest.
Complete are now the bounties you have given,
Be all those bounties but confirm’d by Heaven!
So may I find, when all my wanderings cease,
My consort blameless, and my friends in peace.
On you be every bliss; and every day,
In home-felt joys, delighted roll away;
Yourselves, your wives, your long-descending race,
May every god enrich with every grace!
Sure fix’d on virtue may your nation stand,
And public evil never touch the land!”

His words well weigh’d, the general voice approved
Benign, and instant his dismission moved,
The monarch to Pontonus gave the sign.
To fill the goblet high with rosy wine;
“Great Jove the Father first (he cried) implore;
Then send the stranger to his native shore.”

The luscious wine the obedient herald brought;
Around the mansion flow’d the purple draught;
Each from his seat to each immortal pours,
Whom glory circles in the Olympian bowers
Ulysses sole with air majestic stands,
The bowl presenting to Arete’s hands;
Then thus: “O queen, farewell! be still possess’d
Of dear remembrance, blessing still and bless’d!
Till age and death shall gently call thee hence,
(Sure fate of every mortal excellence!)
Farewell! and joys successive ever spring
To thee, to thine, the people, and the king!”

Thus he: then parting prints the sandy shore
To the fair port: a herald march’d before,
Sent by Alcinous; of Arete’s train
Three chosen maids attend him to the main;
This does a tunic and white vest convey,
A various casket that, of rich inlay,
And bread and wine the third. The cheerful mates
Safe in the hollow poop dispose the cates;
Upon the deck soft painted robes they spread
With linen cover’d, for the hero’s bed.
He climbed the lofty stern; then gently press’d
The swelling couch, and lay composed to rest.

Now placed in order, the Phæacian train
Their cables loose, and launch into the main;
At once they bend, and strike their equal oars,
And leave the sinking hills and lessening shores.
While on the deck the chief in silence lies,
And pleasing slumbers steal upon his eyes.
As fiery coursers in the rapid race
Urged by fierce drivers through the dusty space,
Toss their high heads, and scour along the plain,
So mounts the bounding vessel o’er the main.
Back to the stern the parted billows flow,
And the black ocean foams and roars below.

Thus with spread sails the winged galley flies;
Less swift an eagle cuts the liquid skies;
Divine Ulysses was her sacred load,
A man, in wisdom equal to a god!
Much danger, long and mighty toils he bore,
In storms by sea, and combats on the shore;
All which soft sleep now banish’d from his breast,
Wrapp’d in a pleasing, deep, and death-like rest.

But when the morning-star with early ray
Flamed in the front of heaven, and promised day;
Like distant clouds the mariner descries
Fair Ithaca’s emerging hills arise.
Far from the town a spacious port appears,
Sacred to Phorcys’ power, whose name it bears;
Two craggy rocks projecting to the main,
The roaring wind’s tempestuous rage restrain;
Within the waves in softer murmurs glide,
And ships secure without their halsers ride.
High at the head a branching olive grows,
And crowns the pointed cliffs with shady boughs.
Beneath, a gloomy grotto’s cool recess
Delights the Nereids of the neighbouring seas,
Where bowls and urns were form’d of living stone,
And massy beams in native marble shone,
On which the labours of the nymphs were roll’d,
Their webs divine of purple mix’d with gold.
Within the cave the clustering bees attend
Their waxen works, or from the roof depend.
Perpetual waters o’er the pavement glide;
Two marble doors unfold on either side;
Sacred the south, by which the gods descend;
But mortals enter at the northern end.

Thither they bent, and haul’d their ship to land
(The crooked keel divides the yellow sand).
Ulysses sleeping on his couch they bore,
And gently placed him on the rocky shore.
His treasures next, Alcinous’ gifts, they laid
In the wild olive’s unfrequented shade,
Secure from theft; then launch’d the bark again,
Resumed their oars, and measured back the main,
Nor yet forgot old Ocean’s dread supreme,
The vengeance vow’d for eyeless Polypheme.
Before the throne of mighty Jove he stood,
And sought the secret counsels of the god.

“Shall then no more, O sire of gods! be mine
The rights and honours of a power divine?
Scorn’d e’en by man, and (oh severe disgrace!)
By soft Phæacians, my degenerate race!
Against yon destined head in vain I swore,
And menaced vengeance, ere he reach’d his shore;
To reach his natal shore was thy decree;
Mild I obey’d, for who shall war with thee?
Behold him landed, careless and asleep,
From all the eluded dangers of the deep;
Lo where he lies, amidst a shining store
Of brass, rich garments, and refulgent ore;
And bears triumphant to his native isle
A prize more worth than Ilion’s noble spoil.”

To whom the Father of the immortal powers,
Who swells the clouds, and gladdens earth with showers,
“Can mighty Neptune thus of man complain?
Neptune, tremendous o’er the boundless main!
Revered and awful e’en in heaven’s abodes,
Ancient and great! a god above the gods!
If that low race offend thy power divine
(Weak, daring creatures!) is not vengeance thine?
Go, then, the guilty at thy will chastise.”
He said. The shaker of the earth replies:

“This then, I doom: to fix the gallant ship,
A mark of vengeance on the sable deep;
To warn the thoughtless, self-confiding train,
No more unlicensed thus to brave the main.
Full in their port a Shady hill shall rise,
If such thy will.”—“We will it (Jove replies).
E’en when with transport blackening all the strand,
The swarming people hail their ship to land,
Fix her for ever, a memorial stone:
Still let her seem to sail, and seem alone.
The trembling crowds shall see the sudden shade
Of whelming mountains overhang their head!”

With that the god whose earthquakes rock the ground
Fierce to Phæacia cross’d the vast profound.
Swift as a swallow sweeps the liquid way,
The winged pinnace shot along the sea.
The god arrests her with a sudden stroke,
And roots her down an everlasting rock.
Aghast the Scherians stand in deep surprise;
All press to speak, all question with their eyes.
What hands unseen the rapid bark restrain!
And yet it swims, or seems to swim, the main!
Thus they, unconscious of the deed divine;
Till great Alcinous, rising, own’d the sign.

“Behold the long predestined day! (he cries;)
O certain faith of ancient prophecies
These ears have heard my royal sire disclose
A dreadful story, big with future woes;
How, moved with wrath, that careless we convey
Promiscuous every guest to every bay,
Stern Neptune raged; and how by his command
Firm rooted in the surge a ship should stand
(A monument of wrath); and mound on mound
Should hide our walls, or whelm beneath the ground.

“The Fates have follow’d as declared the seer.
Be humbled, nations! and your monarch hear.
No more unlicensed brave the deeps, no more
With every stranger pass from shore to shore;
On angry Neptune now for mercy call;
To his high name let twelve black oxen fall.
So may the god reverse his purposed will,
Nor o’er our city hang the dreadful hill.”

The monarch spoke: they trembled and obey’d,
Forth on the sands the victim oxen led;
The gathered tribes before the altars stand,
And chiefs and rulers, a majestic band.
The king of ocean all the tribes implore;
The blazing altars redden all the shore.

Meanwhile Ulysses in his country lay,
Released from sleep, and round him might survey
The solitary shore and rolling sea.
Yet had his mind through tedious absence lost
The dear resemblance of his native coast;
Besides, Minerva, to secure her care,
Diffused around a veil of thickened air;
For so the gods ordain’d to keep unseen
His royal person from his friends and queen;
Till the proud suitors for their crimes afford
An ample vengeance to their injured lord.

Now all the land another prospect bore,
Another port appear’d, another shore.
And long-continued ways, and winding floods,
And unknown mountains, crown’d with unknown woods
Pensive and slow, with sudden grief oppress’d,
The king arose, and beat his careful breast,
Cast a long look o’er all the coast and main,
And sought, around, his native realm in vain;
Then with erected eyes stood fix’d in woe,
And as he spoke, the tears began to flow.

“Ye gods (he cried), upon what barren coast,
In what new region, is Ulysses toss’d?
Possess’d by wild barbarians, fierce in arms?
Or men whose bosom tender pity warms?
Where shall this treasure now in safely lie?
And whither, whither its sad owner fly?
Ah, why did I Alcinous’ grace implore?
Ah, why forsake Phæacia’s happy shore?
Some juster prince perhaps had entertain’d,
And safe restored me to my native land.
Is this the promised, long-expected coast,
And this the faith Phæacia’s rulers boast?
O righteous gods! of all the great, how few
Are just to Heaven, and to their promise true!
But he, the power to whose all-seeing eyes
The deeds of men appear without disguise,
’Tis his alone to avenge the wrongs I bear;
For still the oppress’d are his peculiar care.
To count these presents, and from thence to prove,
Their faith is mine; the rest belongs to Jove.”

Then on the sands he ranged his wealthy store,
The gold, the vests, the tripods number’d o’er:
All these he found, but still in error lost,
Disconsolate he wanders on the coast,
Sighs for his country, and laments again
To the deaf rocks, and hoarse-resounding main.
When lo! the guardian goddess of the wise,
Celestial Pallas, stood before his eyes;
In show a youthful swain, of form divine,
Who seem’d descended from some princely line.
A graceful robe her slender body dress’d;
Around her shoulders flew the waving vest;
Her decent hand a shining javelin bore,
And painted sandals on her feet she wore.
To whom the king: “Whoe’er of human race
Thou art, that wanderest in this desert place,
With joy to thee, as to some god I bend,
To thee my treasures and myself commend.
O tell a wretch in exile doom’d to stray,
What air I breathe, what country I survey?
The fruitful continent’s extremest bound,
Or some fair isle which Neptune’s arms surround?

“From what far clime (said she) remote from fame
Arrivest thou here, a stranger to our name?
Thou seest an island, not to those unknown
Whose hills are brighten’d by the rising sun,
Nor those that placed beneath his utmost reign
Behold him sinking in the western main.
The rugged soil allows no level space
For flying chariots, or the rapid race;
Yet, not ungrateful to the peasant’s pain,
Suffices fulness to the swelling grain;
The loaded trees their various fruits produce,
And clustering grapes afford a generous juice;
Woods crown our mountains, and in every grove
The bounding goats and frisking heifers rove;
Soft rains and kindly dews refresh the field,
And rising springs eternal verdure yield.
E’en to those shores is Ithaca renown’d,
Where Troy’s majestic ruins strew the ground.”

At this, the chief with transport was possess’d;
His panting heart exulted in his breast;
Yet, well dissembling his untimely joys,
And veiling truth in plausible disguise,
Thus, with an air sincere, in fiction bold,
His ready tale the inventive hero told:

“Oft have I heard in Crete this island’s name;
For ’twas from Crete, my native soil, I came,
Self-banished thence. I sail’d before the wind,
And left my children and my friends behind.
From fierce Idomeneus’ revenge I flew,
Whose son, the swift Orsilochus, I slew
(With brutal force he seized my Trojan prey,
Due to the toils of many a bloody day).
Unseen I ’scaped, and favour’d by the night,
In a Phoenician vessel took my flight,
For Pyle or Elis bound; but tempests toss’d
And raging billows drove us on your coast.
In dead of night an unknown port we gain’d;
Spent with fatigue, and slept secure on land.
But ere the rosy morn renew’d the day,
While in the embrace of pleasing sleep I lay,
Sudden, invited by auspicious gales,
They land my goods, and hoist their flying sails.
Abandon’d here, my fortune I deplore
A hapless exile on a foreign shore,”

Thus while he spoke, the blue-eyed maid began
With pleasing smiles to view the godlike man;
Then changed her form: and now, divinely bright,
Jove’s heavenly daughter stood confess’d to sight;
Like a fair virgin in her beauty’s bloom,
Skill’d in the illustrious labours of the loom.

“O still the same Ulysses! (she rejoin’d,)
In useful craft successfully refined!
Artful in speech, in action, and in mind!
Sufficed it not, that, thy long labours pass’d,
Secure thou seest thy native shore at last?
But this to me? who, like thyself, excel
In arts of counsel and dissembling well;
To me? whose wit exceeds the powers divine,
No less than mortals are surpass’d by thine.
Know’st thou not me; who made thy life my care,
Through ten years’ wandering, and through ten years’ war;
Who taught thee arts, Alcinous to persuade,
To raise his wonder, and engage his aid;
And now appear, thy treasures to protect,
Conceal thy person, thy designs direct,
And tell what more thou must from Fate expect;
Domestic woes far heavier to be borne!
The pride of fools, and slaves’ insulting scorn?
But thou be silent, nor reveal thy state;
Yield to the force of unresisted Fate,
And bear unmoved the wrongs of base mankind,
The last, and hardest, conquest of the mind.”

“Goddess of wisdom! (Ithacus replies,)
He who discerns thee must be truly wise,
So seldom view’d and ever in disguise!
When the bold Argives led their warring powers,
Against proud Ilion’s well-defended towers,
Ulysses was thy care, celestial maid!
Graced with thy sight, and favoured with thy aid.
But when the Trojan piles in ashes lay,
And bound for Greece we plough’d the watery way;
Our fleet dispersed, and driven from coast to coast,
Thy sacred presence from that hour I lost;
Till I beheld thy radiant form once more,
And heard thy counsels on Phæacia’s shore.
But, by the almighty author of thy race,
Tell me, oh tell, is this my native place?
For much I fear, long tracts of land and sea
Divide this coast from distant Ithaca;
The sweet delusion kindly you impose,
To soothe my hopes, and mitigate my woes.”

Thus he. The blue-eyed goddess thus replies;
“How prone to doubt, how cautious are the wise!
Who, versed in fortune, fear the flattering show,
And taste not half the bliss the gods bestow.
The more shall Pallas aid thy just desires,
And guard the wisdom which herself inspires.
Others long absent from their native place,
Straight seek their home, and fly with eager pace
To their wives’ arms, and children’s dear embrace.
Not thus Ulysses; he decrees to prove
His subjects’ faith, and queen’s suspected love;
Who mourn’d her lord twice ten revolving years,
And wastes the days in grief, the nights in tears.
But Pallas knew (thy friends and navy lost)
Once more ’twas given thee to behold thy coast;
Yet how could I with adverse Fate engage,
And mighty Neptune’s unrelenting rage?
Now lift thy longing eyes, while I restore
The pleasing prospect of thy native shore.
Bebold the port of Phorcys! fenced around
With rocky mountains, and with olives crown’d,
Behold the gloomy grot! whose cool recess
Delights the Nereids of the neighbouring seas;
Whose now-neglected altars in thy reign
Blush’d with the blood of sheep and oxen slain,
Behold! where Neritus the clouds divides,
And shakes the waving forests on his sides.”

So spake the goddess; and the prospect clear’d,
The mists dispersed, and all the coast appeared.
The king with joy confess’d his place of birth,
And on his knees salutes his mother earth;
Then, with his suppliant hands upheld in air,
Thus to the sea-green sisters sends his prayer;

“All hail! ye virgin daughters of the main!
Ye streams, beyond my hopes, beheld again!
To you once more your own Ulysses bows;
Attend his transports, and receive his vows!
If Jove prolong my days, and Pallas crown
The growing virtues of my youthful son,
To you shall rites divine be ever paid,
And grateful offerings on your altars laid.”

Thus then Minerva: “From that anxious breast
Dismiss those cares, and leave to heaven the rest.
Our task be now thy treasured stores to save,
Deep in the close recesses of the cave;
Then future means consult.” She spoke, and trod
The shady grot, that brighten’d with the god.
The closest caverns of the grot she sought;
The gold, the brass, the robes, Ulysses brought;
These in the secret gloom the chief disposed;
The entrance with a rock the goddess closed.

Now, seated in the olive’s sacred shade,
Confer the hero and the martial maid.
The goddess of the azure eyes began:
“Son of Laertes! much-experienced man!
The suitor-train thy earliest care demand,
Of that luxurious race to rid the land;
Three years thy house their lawless rule has seen,
And proud addresses to the matchless queen.
But she thy absence mourns from day to day,
And inly bleeds, and silent wastes away;
Elusive of the bridal hour, she gives
Fond hopes to all, and all with hopes deceives.”

To this Ulysses: “O celestial maid!
Praised be thy counsel, and thy timely aid;
Else had I seen my native walls in vain,
Like great Atrides, just restored and slain.
Vouchsafe the means of vengeance to debate,
And plan with all thy arts the scene of fate.
Then, then be present, and my soul inspire,
As when we wrapp’d Troy’s heaven-built walls in fire.
Though leagued against me hundred heroes stand.
Hundreds shall fall, if Pallas aid my hand.”

She answer’d: “In the dreadful day of fight
Know, I am with thee, strong in all my might.
If thou but equal to thyself be found,
What gasping numbers then shall press the ground!
What human victims stain the feastful floor!
How wide the pavements float with guilty gore!
It fits thee now to wear a dark disguise,
And secret walk unknown to mortal eyes.
For this, my hand shall wither every grace,
And every elegance of form and face;
O’er thy smooth skin a bark of wrinkles spread,
Turn hoar the auburn honours of thy head;
Disfigure every limb with coarse attire,
And in thy eyes extinguish all the fire;
Add all the wants and the decays of life;
Estrange thee from thy own; thy son, thy wife;
From the loathed object every sight shall turn,
And the blind suitors their destruction scorn.

“Go first the master of thy herds to find,
True to his charge, a loyal swain and kind;
For thee he sighs; and to the loyal heir
And chaste Penelope extends his care.
At the Coracian rock he now resides,
Where Arethusa’s sable water glides;
The sable water and the copious mast
Swell the fat herd; luxuriant, large repast!
With him rest peaceful in the rural cell,
And all you ask his faithful tongue shall tell.
Me into other realms my cares convey,
To Sparta, still with female beauty gay;
For know, to Sparta thy loved offspring came,
To learn thy fortunes from the voice of Fame.”

At this the father, with a father’s care:
“Must he too suffer? he, O goddess! bear
Of wanderings and of woes a wretched share?
Through the wild ocean plough the dangerous way,
And leave his fortunes and his house a prey?
Why would’st not thou, O all-enlighten’d mind!
Inform him certain, and protect him, kind?”

To whom Minerva: “Be thy soul at rest;
And know, whatever heaven ordains is best.
To fame I sent him, to acquire renown;
To other regions is his virtue known;
Secure he sits, near great Atrides placed;
With friendships strengthen’d, and with honours graced,
But lo! an ambush waits his passage o’er;
Fierce foes insidious intercept the shore;
In vain; far sooner all the murderous brood
This injured land shall fatten with their blood.”

She spake, then touch’d him with her powerful wand:
The skin shrunk up, and wither’d at her hand;
A swift old age o’er all his members spread;
A sudden frost was sprinkled on his head;
Nor longer in the heavy eye-ball shined
The glance divine, forth-beaming from the mind.
His robe, which spots indelible besmear,
In rags dishonest flutters with the air:
A stag’s torn hide is lapp’d around his reins;
A rugged staff his trembling hand sustains;
And at his side a wretched scrip was hung,
Wide-patch’d, and knotted to a twisted thong.
So looked the chief, so moved: to mortal eyes
Object uncouth! a man of miseries!
While Pallas, cleaving the wild fields of air,
To Sparta flies, Telemachus her care.







But he, deep-musing, o’er the mountains stray’d
Through mazy thickets of the woodland shade,
And cavern’d ways, the shaggy coast along
With cliffs and nodding forests overhung.
Eumaeus at his sylvan lodge he sought,
A faithful servant, and without a fault.
Ulysses found him busied as he sate
Before the threshold of his rustic gate;
Around the mansion in a circle shone
A rural portico of rugged stone
(In absence of his lord with honest toil
His own industrious hands had raised the pile).
The wall was stone from neighbouring quarries borne,
Encircled with a fence of native thorn,
And strong with pales, by many a weary stroke
Of stubborn labour hewn from heart of oak:
Frequent and thick. Within the space were rear’d
Twelve ample cells, the lodgments of his herd.
Full fifty pregnant females each contain’d;
The males without (a smaller race) remain’d;
Doom’d to supply the suitors’ wasteful feast,
A stock by daily luxury decreased;
Now scarce four hundred left. These to defend,
Four savage dogs, a watchful guard, attend.
Here sat Eumaeus, and his cares applied
To form strong buskins of well-season’d hide.
Of four assistants who his labour share,
Three now were absent on the rural care;
The fourth drove victims to a suitor train:
But he, of ancient faith, a simple swain,
Sigh’d, while he furnish’d the luxurious board,
And wearied Heaven with wishes for his lord.

Soon as Ulysses near the inclosure drew,
With open mouths the furious mastiffs flew:
Down sat the sage, and cautious to withstand,
Let fall the offensive truncheon from his hand.
Sudden, the master runs; aloud he calls;
And from his hasty hand the leather falls:
With showers of stones he drives then far away:
The scattering dogs around at distance bay.

“Unhappy stranger! (thus the faithful swain
Began with accent gracious and humane),
What sorrow had been mine, if at my gate
Thy reverend age had met a shameful fate!
Enough of woes already have I known;
Enough my master’s sorrows and my own.
While here (ungrateful task!) his herds I feed,
Ordain’d for lawless rioters to bleed!
Perhaps, supported at another’s board!
Far from his country roams my hapless lord;
Or sigh’d in exile forth his latest breath,
Now cover’d with the eternal shade of death!

“But enter this my homely roof, and see
Our woods not void of hospitality.
Then tell me whence thou art, and what the share
Of woes and wanderings thou wert born to bear.”

He said, and, seconding the kind request,
With friendly step precedes his unknown guest.
A shaggy goat’s soft hide beneath him spread,
And with fresh rushes heap’d an ample bed;
Jove touch’d the hero’s tender soul, to find
So just reception from a heart so kind:
And “Oh, ye gods! with all your blessings grace
(He thus broke forth) this friend of human race!”

The swain replied: “It never was our guise
To slight the poor, or aught humane despise:
For Jove unfolds our hospitable door,
’Tis Jove that sends the stranger and the poor,
Little, alas! is all the good I can
A man oppress’d, dependent, yet a man:
Accept such treatment as a swain affords,
Slave to the insolence of youthful lords!
Far hence is by unequal gods removed
That man of bounties, loving and beloved!
To whom whate’er his slave enjoys is owed,
And more, had Fate allow’d, had been bestow’d:
But Fate condemn’d him to a foreign shore;
Much have I sorrow’d, but my Master more.
Now cold he lies, to death’s embrace resign’d:
Ah, perish Helen! perish all her kind!
For whose cursed cause, in Agamemnon’s name,
He trod so fatally the paths of fame.”

His vest succinct then girding round his waist,
Forth rush’d the swain with hospitable haste.
Straight to the lodgments of his herd he run,
Where the fat porkers slept beneath the sun;
Of two, his cutlass launch’d the spouting blood;
These quarter’d, singed, and fix’d on forks of wood,
All hasty on the hissing coals he threw;
And smoking, back the tasteful viands drew.
Broachers and all then an the board display’d
The ready meal, before Ulysses laid
With flour imbrown’d; next mingled wine yet new,
And luscious as the bees’ nectareous dew:
Then sate, companion of the friendly feast,
With open look; and thus bespoke his guest:
“Take with free welcome what our hands prepare,
Such food as falls to simple servants’ share;
The best our lords consume; those thoughtless peers,
Rich without bounty, guilty without fears;
Yet sure the gods their impious acts detest,
And honour justice and the righteous breast.
Pirates and conquerors of harden’d mind,
The foes of peace, and scourges of mankind,
To whom offending men are made a prey
When Jove in vengeance gives a land away;
E’en these, when of their ill-got spoils possess’d,
Find sure tormentors in the guilty breast:
Some voice of God close whispering from within,
‘Wretch! this is villainy, and this is sin.’
But these, no doubt, some oracle explore,
That tells, the great Ulysses is no more.
Hence springs their confidence, and from our sighs
Their rapine strengthens, and their riots rise:
Constant as Jove the night and day bestows,
Bleeds a whole hecatomb, a vintage flows.
None match’d this hero’s wealth, of all who reign
O’er the fair islands of the neighbouring main.
Nor all the monarchs whose far-dreaded sway
The wide-extended continents obey:
First, on the main land, of Ulysses’ breed
Twelve herds, twelve flocks, on ocean’s margin feed;
As many stalls for shaggy goats are rear’d;
As many lodgments for the tusky herd;
Two foreign keepers guard: and here are seen
Twelve herds of goats that graze our utmost green;
To native pastors is their charge assign’d,
And mine the care to feed the bristly kind;
Each day the fattest bleeds of either herd,
All to the suitors’ wasteful board preferr’d.”
Thus he, benevolent: his unknown guest
With hunger keen devours the savoury feast;
While schemes of vengeance ripen in his breast.
Silent and thoughtful while the board he eyed,
Eumaeus pours on high the purple tide;
The king with smiling looks his joy express’d,
And thus the kind inviting host address’d:

“Say now, what man is he, the man deplored,
So rich, so potent, whom you style your lord?
Late with such affluence and possessions bless’d,
And now in honour’s glorious bed at rest.
Whoever was the warrior, he must be
To fame no stranger, nor perhaps to me:
Who (so the gods and so the Fates ordain’d)
Have wander’d many a sea, and many a land.”

“Small is the faith the prince and queen ascribe
(Replied Eumaeus) to the wandering tribe.
For needy strangers still to flattery fly,
And want too oft betrays the tongue to lie.
Each vagrant traveller, that touches here,
Deludes with fallacies the royal ear,
To dear remembrance makes his image rise,
And calls the springing sorrows from her eyes.
Such thou mayst be. But he whose name you crave
Moulders in earth, or welters on the wave,
Or food for fish or dogs his relics lie,
Or torn by birds are scatter’d through the sky.
So perish’d he: and left (for ever lost)
Much woe to all, but sure to me the most.
So mild a master never shall I find;
Less dear the parents whom I left behind,
Less soft my mother, less my father kind.
Not with such transport would my eyes run o’er,
Again to hail them in their native shore,
As loved Ulysses once more to embrace,
Restored and breathing in his natal place.
That name for ever dread, yet ever dear,
E’en in his absence I pronounce with fear:
In my respect, he bears a prince’s part;
But lives a very brother in my heart.”

Thus spoke the faithful swain, and thus rejoin’d
The master of his grief, the man of patient mind:
“Ulysses, friend! shall view his old abodes
(Distrustful as thou art), nor doubt the gods.
Nor speak I rashly, but with faith averr’d,
And what I speak attesting Heaven has heard.
If so, a cloak and vesture be my meed:
Till his return no title shall I plead,
Though certain be my news, and great my need.
Whom want itself can force untruths to tell,
My soul detests him as the gates of hell.

“Thou first be witness, hospitable Jove!
And every god inspiring social love!
And witness every household power that waits,
Guard of these fires, and angel of these gates!
Ere the next moon increase or this decay,
His ancient realms Ulysses shall survey,
In blood and dust each proud oppressor mourn,
And the lost glories of his house return.”

“Nor shall that meed be thine, nor ever more
Shall loved Ulysses hail this happy shore.
(Replied Eumaeus): to the present hour
Now turn thy thought, and joys within our power.
From sad reflection let my soul repose;
The name of him awakes a thousand woes.
But guard him, gods! and to these arms restore!
Not his true consort can desire him more;
Not old Laertes, broken with despair:
Not young Telemachus, his blooming heir.
Alas, Telemachus! my sorrows flow
Afresh for thee, my second cause of woe!
Like some fair plant set by a heavenly hand,
He grew, he flourish’d, and he bless’d the land;
In all the youth his father’s image shined,
Bright in his person, brighter in his mind.
What man, or god, deceived his better sense,
Far on the swelling seas to wander hence?
To distant Pylos hapless is he gone,
To seek his father’s fate and find his own!
For traitors wait his way, with dire design
To end at once the great Arcesian line.
But let us leave him to their wills above;
The fates of men are in the hand of Jove.
And now, my venerable guest! declare
Your name, your parents, and your native air:
Sincere from whence begun, your course relate,
And to what ship I owe the friendly freight?”

Thus he: and thus (with prompt invention bold)
The cautious chief his ready story told.

“On dark reserve what better can prevail,
Or from the fluent tongue produce the tale,
Than when two friends, alone, in peaceful place
Confer, and wines and cates the table grace;
But most, the kind inviter’s cheerful face?
Thus might we sit, with social goblets crown’d,
Till the whole circle of the year goes round:
Not the whole circle of the year would close
My long narration of a life of woes.
But such was Heaven’s high will! Know then, I came
From sacred Crete, and from a sire of fame:
Castor Hylacides (that name he bore),
Beloved and honour’d in his native shore;
Bless’d in his riches, in his children more.
Sprung of a handmaid, from a bought embrace,
I shared his kindness with his lawful race:
But when that fate, which all must undergo,
From earth removed him to the shades below,
The large domain his greedy sons divide,
And each was portion’d as the lots decide.
Little, alas! was left my wretched share,
Except a house, a covert from the air:
But what by niggard fortune was denied,
A willing widow’s copious wealth supplied.
My valour was my plea, a gallant mind,
That, true to honour, never lagg’d behind
(The sex is ever to a soldier kind).
Now wasting years my former strength confound,
And added woes have bow’d me to the ground;
Yet by the stubble you may guess the grain,
And mark the ruins of no vulgar man.
Me, Pallas gave to lead the martial storm,
And the fair ranks of battle to deform;
Me, Mars inspired to turn the foe to flight,
And tempt the secret ambush of the night.
Let ghastly Death in all his forms appear,
I saw him not, it was not mine to fear.
Before the rest I raised my ready steel,
The first I met, he yielded, or he fell.
But works of peace my soul disdain’d to bear,
The rural labour, or domestic care.
To raise the mast, the missile dart to wing,
And send swift arrows from the bounding string,
Were arts the gods made grateful to my mind;
Those gods, who turn (to various ends design’d)
The various thoughts and talents of mankind.
Before the Grecians touch’d the Trojan plain,
Nine times commander or by land or main,
In foreign fields I spread my glory far,
Great in the praise, rich in the spoils of war;
Thence charged with riches, as increased in fame,
To Crete return’d, an honourable name.
But when great Jove that direful war decreed,
Which roused all Greece, and made the mighty bleed;
Our states myself and Idomen employ
To lead their fleets, and carry death to Troy.
Nine years we warr’d; the tenth saw Ilion fall;
Homeward we sail’d, but heaven dispersed us all.
One only month my wife enjoy’d my stay;
So will’d the god who gives and takes away.
Nine ships I mann’d, equipp’d with ready stores,
Intent to voyage to the Ægyptian shores;
In feast and sacrifice my chosen train
Six days consum’d; the seventh we plough’d the main.
Crete’s ample fields diminish to our eye;
Before the Boreal blast the vessels fly;
Safe through the level seas we sweep our way;
The steersman governs, and the ships obey.
The fifth fair morn we stem the Ægyptian tide,
And tilting o’er the bay the vessels ride:
To anchor there my fellows I command,
And spies commission to explore the land.
But, sway’d by lust of gain, and headlong will,
The coasts they ravage, and the natives kill.
The spreading clamour to their city flies,
And horse and foot in mingled tumult rise.
The reddening dawn reveals the circling fields,
Horrid with bristly spears, and glancing shields.
Jove thunder’d on their side. Our guilty head
We turn’d to flight; the gathering vengeance spread
On all parts round, and heaps on heaps lie dead.
I then explored my thought, what course to prove
(And sure the thought was dictated by Jove):
Oh, had he left me to that happier doom,
And saved a life of miseries to come!
The radiant helmet from my brows unlaced,
And low on earth my shield and javelin cast,
I meet the monarch with a suppliant’s face,
Approach his chariot, and his knees embrace,
He heard, he saved, he placed me at his side;
My state he pitied, and my tears he dried,
Restrain’d the rage the vengeful foe express’d,
And turn’d the deadly weapons from my breast.
Pious! to guard the hospitable rite,
And fearing Jove, whom mercy’s works delight.

“In Ægypt thus with peace and plenty bless’d,
I lived (and happy still have lived) a guest.
On seven bright years successive blessings wait;
The next changed all the colour of my fate.
A false Phoenician, of insiduous mind,
Versed in vile arts, and foe to humankind,
With semblance fair invites me to his home;
I seized the proffer (ever fond to roam):
Domestic in his faithless roof I stay’d,
Till the swift sun his annual circle made.
To Libya then he mediates the way;
With guileful art a stranger to betray,
And sell to bondage in a foreign land:
Much doubting, yet compell’d I quit the strand,
Through the mid seas the nimble pinnace sails,
Aloof from Crete, before the northern gales:
But when remote her chalky cliffs we lost,
And far from ken of any other coast,
When all was wild expanse of sea and air,
Then doom’d high Jove due vengeance to prepare.
He hung a night of horrors o’er their head
(The shaded ocean blacken’d as it spread):
He launch’d the fiery bolt: from pole to pole
Broad burst the lightnings, deep the thunders roll;
In giddy rounds the whirling ship is toss’d,
And all in clouds of smothering sulphur lost.
As from a hanging rock’s tremendous height,
The sable crows with intercepted flight
Drop endlong; scarr’d, and black with sulphurous hue,
So from the deck are hurl’d the ghastly crew.
Such end the wicked found! but Jove’s intent
Was yet to save the oppress’d and innocent.
Placed on the mast (the last resource of life)
With winds and waves I held unequal strife:
For nine long days the billows tilting o’er,
The tenth soft wafts me to Thesprotia’s shore.
The monarch’s son a shipwreck’d wretch relieved,
The sire with hospitable rites received,
And in his palace like a brother placed,
With gifts of price and gorgeous garments graced
While here I sojourn’d, oft I heard the fame
How late Ulysses to the country came.
How loved, how honour’d in this court he stay’d,
And here his whole collected treasure laid;
I saw myself the vast unnumber’d store
Of steel elaborate, and refulgent ore,
And brass high heap’d amidst the regal dome;
Immense supplies for ages yet to come!
Meantime he voyaged to explore the will
Of Jove, on high Dodona’s holy hill,
What means might best his safe return avail,
To come in pomp, or bear a secret sail?
Full oft has Phidon, whilst he pour’d the wine,
Attesting solemn all the powers divine,
That soon Ulysses would return, declared
The sailors waiting, and the ships prepared.
But first the king dismiss’d me from his shores,
For fair Dulichium crown’d with fruitful stores;
To good Acastus’ friendly care consign’d:
But other counsels pleased the sailors’ mind:
New frauds were plotted by the faithless train,
And misery demands me once again.
Soon as remote from shore they plough the wave,
With ready hands they rush to seize their slave;
Then with these tatter’d rags they wrapp’d me round
(Stripp’d of my own), and to the vessel bound.
At eve, at Ithaca’s delightful land
The ship arriv’d: forth issuing on the sand,
They sought repast; while to the unhappy kind,
The pitying gods themselves my chains unbind.
Soft I descended, to the sea applied
My naked breast, and shot along the tide.
Soon pass’d beyond their sight, I left the flood,
And took the spreading shelter of the wood.
Their prize escaped the faithless pirates mourn’d;
But deem’d inquiry vain, and to their ships return’d.
Screen’d by protecting gods from hostile eyes,
They led me to a good man and a wise,
To live beneath thy hospitable care,
And wait the woes Heaven dooms me yet to bear.”

“Unhappy guest! whose sorrows touch my mind!
(Thus good Eumaeus with a sigh rejoin’d,)
For real sufferings since I grieve sincere,
Check not with fallacies the springing tear:
Nor turn the passion into groundless joy
For him whom Heaven has destined to destroy.
Oh! had he perish’d on some well-fought day,
Or in his friend’s embraces died away!
That grateful Greece with streaming eyes might raise
Historic marbles to record his praise;
His praise, eternal on the faithful stone,
Had with transmissive honours graced his son.
Now, snatch’d by harpies to the dreary coast,
Sunk is the hero, and his glory lost!
While pensive in this solitary den,
Far from gay cities and the ways of men,
I linger life; nor to the court repair,
But when my constant queen commands my care;
Or when, to taste her hospitable board,
Some guest arrives, with rumours of her lord;
And these indulge their want, and those their woe,
And here the tears and there the goblets flow.
By many such have I been warn’d; but chief
By one Aetolian robb’d of all belief,
Whose hap it was to this our roof to roam,
For murder banish’d from his native home.
He swore, Ulysses on the coast of Crete
Stay’d but a season to refit his fleet;
A few revolving months should waft him o’er,
Fraught with bold warriors, and a boundless store
O thou! whom age has taught to understand,
And Heaven has guided with a favouring hand!
On god or mortal to obtrude a lie
Forbear, and dread to flatter as to die.
Nor for such ends my house and heart are free,
But dear respect to Jove, and charity.”

“And why, O swain of unbelieving mind!
(Thus quick replied the wisest of mankind)
Doubt you my oath? yet more my faith to try,
A solemn compact let us ratify,
And witness every power that rules the sky!
If here Ulysses from his labours rest,
Be then my prize a tunic and a vest;
And where my hopes invite me, straight transport
In safety to Dulichium’s friendly court.
But if he greets not thy desiring eye,
Hurl me from yon dread precipice on high:
The due reward of fraud and perjury.”

“Doubtless, O guest! great laud and praise were mine
(Replied the swain, for spotless faith divine),
If after social rites and gifts bestow’d,
I stain’d my hospitable hearth with blood.
How would the gods my righteous toils succeed,
And bless the hand that made a stranger bleed?
No more—the approaching hours of silent night
First claim refection, then to rest invite;
Beneath our humble cottage let us haste,
And here, unenvied, rural dainties taste.”

Thus communed these; while to their lowly dome
The full-fed swine return’d with evening home;
Compell’d, reluctant, to their several sties,
With din obstreperous, and ungrateful cries.
Then to the slaves: “Now from the herd the best
Select in honour of our foreign guest:
With him let us the genial banquet share,
For great and many are the griefs we bear;
While those who from our labours heap their board
Blaspheme their feeder, and forget their lord.”

Thus speaking, with despatchful hand he took
A weighty axe, and cleft the solid oak;
This on the earth he piled; a boar full fed,
Of five years’ age, before the pile was led:
The swain, whom acts of piety delight,
Observant of the gods, begins the rite;
First shears the forehead of the bristly boar,
And suppliant stands, invoking every power
To speed Ulysses to his native shore.
A knotty stake then aiming at his head,
Down dropped he groaning, and the spirit fled.
The scorching flames climb round on every side;
Then the singed members they with skill divide;
On these, in rolls of fat involved with art,
The choicest morsels lay from every part.
Some in the flames bestrew’d with flour they threw;
Some cut in fragments from the forks they drew:
These while on several tables they dispose.
A priest himself the blameless rustic rose;
Expert the destined victim to dispart
In seven just portions, pure of hand and heart.
One sacred to the nymphs apart they lay:
Another to the winged son of May;
The rural tribe in common share the rest,
The king the chine, the honour of the feast,
Who sate delighted at his servant’s board;
The faithful servant joy’d his unknown lord.
“Oh be thou dear (Ulysses cried) to Jove,
As well thou claim’st a grateful stranger’s love!”

“Be then thy thanks (the bounteous swain replied)
Enjoyment of the good the gods provide.
From God’s own hand descend our joys and woes;
These he decrees, and he but suffers those:
All power is his, and whatsoe’er he wills,
The will itself, omnipotent, fulfils.”
This said, the first-fruits to the gods he gave;
Then pour’d of offer’d wine the sable wave:
In great Ulysses’ hand he placed the bowl,
He sate, and sweet refection cheer’d his soul.
The bread from canisters Mesaulius gave
(Eumaeus’ proper treasure bought this slave,
And led from Taphos, to attend his board,
A servant added to his absent lord);
His task it was the wheaten loaves to lay,
And from the banquet take the bowls away.
And now the rage of hunger was repress’d,
And each betakes him to his couch to rest.

Now came the night, and darkness cover’d o’er
The face of things; the winds began to roar;
The driving storm the watery west-wind pours,
And Jove descends in deluges of showers.
Studious of rest and warmth, Ulysses lies,
Foreseeing from the first the storm would rise
In mere necessity of coat and cloak,
With artful preface to his host he spoke:
“Hear me, my friends! who this good banquet grace;
’Tis sweet to play the fool in time and place,
And wine can of their wits the wise beguile,
Make the sage frolic, and the serious smile,
The grave in merry measures frisk about,
And many a long-repented word bring out.
Since to be talkative I now commence,
Let wit cast off the sullen yoke of sense.
Once I was strong (would Heaven restore those days!)
And with my betters claim’d a share of praise.
Ulysses, Menelaus, led forth a band,
And join’d me with them (’twas their own command);
A deathful ambush for the foe to lay,
Beneath Troy walls by night we took our way:
There, clad in arms, along the marshes spread,
We made the osier-fringed bank our bed.
Full soon the inclemency of heaven I feel,
Nor had these shoulders covering, but of steel.
Sharp blew the north; snow whitening all the fields
Froze with the blast, and gathering glazed our shields.
There all but I, well fenced with cloak and vest,
Lay cover’d by their ample shields at rest.
Fool that I was! I left behind my own,
The skill of weather and of winds unknown,
And trusted to my coat and shield alone!
When now was wasted more than half the night,
And the stars faded at approaching light,
Sudden I jogg’d Ulysses, who was laid
Fast by my side, and shivering thus I said:

“‘Here longer in this field I cannot lie;
The winter pinches, and with cold I die,
And die ashamed (O wisest of mankind),
The only fool who left his cloak behind.’

“He thought and answer’d: hardly waking yet,
Sprung in his mind a momentary wit
(That wit, which or in council or in fight,
Still met the emergence, and determined right).
‘Hush thee (he cried, soft whispering in my ear),
Speak not a word, lest any Greek may hear’—
And then (supporting on his arm his head),
‘Hear me, companions! (thus aloud he said:)
Methinks too distant from the fleet we lie:
E’en now a vision stood before my eye,
And sure the warning vision was from high:
Let from among us some swift courier rise,
Haste to the general, and demand supplies.’

“Up started Thoas straight, Andraemon’s son,
Nimbly he rose, and cast his garment down!
Instant, the racer vanish’d off the ground;
That instant in his cloak I wrapp’d me round:
And safe I slept, till brightly-dawning shone
The morn conspicuous on her golden throne.

“Oh were my strength as then, as then my age!
Some friend would fence me from the winter’s rage.
Yet, tatter’d as I look, I challenged then
The honours and the offices of men:
Some master, or some servant would allow
A cloak and vest—but I am nothing now!”

“Well hast thou spoke (rejoin’d the attentive swain):
Thy lips let fall no idle word or vain!
Nor garment shalt thou want, nor aught beside,
Meet for the wandering suppliant to provide.
But in the morning take thy clothes again,
For here one vest suffices every swain:
No change of garments to our hinds is known;
But when return’d, the good Ulysses’ son
With better hand shall grace with fit attires
His guest, and send thee where thy soul desires.”

The honest herdsman rose, as this he said,
And drew before the hearth the stranger’s bed;
The fleecy spoils of sheep, a goat’s rough hide
He spreads; and adds a mantle thick and wide;
With store to heap above him, and below,
And guard each quarter as the tempests blow.
There lay the king, and all the rest supine;
All, but the careful master of the swine:
Forth hasted he to tend his bristly care;
Well arm’d, and fenced against nocturnal air:
His weighty falchion o’er his shoulder tied:
His shaggy cloak a mountain goat supplied:
With his broad spear the dread of dogs and men,
He seeks his lodging in the rocky den.
There to the tusky herd he bends his way,
Where, screen’d from Boreas, high o’erarch’d they lay.







Now had Minerva reach’d those ample plains,
Famed for the dance, where Menelaus reigns:
Anxious she flies to great Ulysses’ heir,
His instant voyage challenged all her care.
Beneath the royal portico display’d,
With Nestor’s son Telemachus was laid:
In sleep profound the son of Nestor lies;
Not thine, Ulysses! Care unseal’d his eyes:
Restless he grieved, with various fears oppress’d,
And all thy fortunes roll’d within his breast.
When, “O Telemachus! (the goddess said)
Too long in vain, too widely hast thou stray’d,
Thus leaving careless thy paternal right
The robbers’ prize, the prey to lawless might.
On fond pursuits neglectful while you roam,
E’en now the hand of rapine sacks the dome.
Hence to Atrides; and his leave implore
To launch thy vessel for thy natal shore;
Fly, whilst thy mother virtuous yet withstands
Her kindred’s wishes, and her sire’s commands;
Through both, Eurymachus pursues the dame,
And with the noblest gifts asserts his claim.
Hence, therefore, while thy stores thy own remain;
Thou know’st the practice of the female train,
Lost in the children of the present spouse,
They slight the pledges of their former vows;
Their love is always with the lover past;
Still the succeeding flame expels the last.
Let o’er thy house some chosen maid preside,
Till Heaven decrees to bless thee in a bride.
But now thy more attentive ears incline,
Observe the warnings of a power divine;
For thee their snares the suitor lords shall lay
In Samos’ sands, or straits of Ithaca;
To seize thy life shall lurk the murderous band,
Ere yet thy footsteps press thy native land.
No!—sooner far their riot and their lust
All-covering earth shall bury deep in dust!
Then distant from the scatter’d islands steer,
Nor let the night retard thy full career;
Thy heavenly guardian shall instruct the gales
To smooth thy passage and supply thy sails:
And when at Ithaca thy labour ends,
Send to the town the vessel with thy friends;
But seek thou first the master of the swine
(For still to thee his loyal thoughts incline);
There pass the night: while he his course pursues
To bring Penelope the wish’d-for news,
That thou, safe sailing from the Pylian strand,
Art come to bless her in thy native land.”
Thus spoke the goddess, and resumed her flight
To the pure regions of eternal light,
Meanwhile Pisistratus he gently shakes,
And with these words the slumbering youth awakes:

“Rise, son of Nestor; for the road prepare,
And join the harness’d coursers to the car.”

“What cause (he cried) can justify our flight
To tempt the dangers of forbidding night?
Here wait we rather, till approaching day
Shall prompt our speed, and point the ready way.
Nor think of flight before the Spartan king
Shall bid farewell, and bounteous presents bring;
Gifts, which to distant ages safely stored,
The sacred act of friendship shall record.”

Thus he. But when the dawn bestreak’d the east,
The king from Helen rose, and sought his guest.
As soon as his approach the hero knew,
The splendid mantle round him first he threw,
Then o’er his ample shoulders whirl’d the cloak,
Respectful met the monarch, and bespoke:

“Hail, great Atrides, favour’d of high Jove!
Let not thy friends in vain for licence move.
Swift let us measure back the watery way,
Nor check our speed, impatient of delay.”

“If with desire so strong thy bosom glows,
Ill (said the king) should I thy wish oppose;
For oft in others freely I reprove
The ill-timed efforts of officious love;
Who love too much, hate in the like extreme,
And both the golden mean alike condemn.
Alike he thwarts the hospitable end,
Who drives the free, or stays the hasty friend:
True friendship’s laws are by this rule express’d,
Welcome the coming, speed the parting guest.
Yet, stay, my friends, and in your chariot take
The noblest presents that our love can make;
Meantime commit we to our women’s care
Some choice domestic viands to prepare;
The traveller, rising from the banquet gay,
Eludes the labours of the tedious way,
Then if a wider course shall rather please,
Through spacious Argos and the realms of Greece,
Atrides in his chariot shall attend;
Himself thy convoy to each royal friend.
No prince will let Ulysses’ heir remove
Without some pledge, some monument of love:
These will the caldron, these the tripod give;
From those the well-pair’d mules we shall receive,
Or bowl emboss’d whose golden figures live.”

To whom the youth, for prudence famed, replied:
“O monarch, care of heaven! thy people’s pride!
No friend in Ithaca my place supplies,
No powerful hands are there, no watchful eyes:
My stores exposed and fenceless house demand
The speediest succour from my guardian hand;
Lest, in a search too anxious and too vain,
Of one lost joy, I lose what yet remain.”

His purpose when the generous warrior heard,
He charged the household cates to be prepared.
Now with the dawn, from his adjoining home,
Was Boethoedes Eteoneus come;
Swift at the word he forms the rising blaze,
And o’er the coals the smoking fragments lays.
Meantime the king, his son, and Helen went
Where the rich wardrobe breathed a costly scent;
The king selected from the glittering rows
A bowl; the prince a silver beaker chose.
The beauteous queen revolved with careful eyes
Her various textures of unnumber’d dyes,
And chose the largest; with no vulgar art
Her own fair hands embroider’d every part;
Beneath the rest it lay divinely bright,
Like radiant Hesper o’er the gems of night,
Then with each gift they hasten’d to their guest,
And thus the king Ulysses’ heir address’d:
“Since fix’d are thy resolves, may thundering Jove
With happiest omens thy desires approve!
This silver bowl, whose costly margins shine
Enchased with gold, this valued gift be thine;
To me this present, of Vulcanian frame,
From Sidon’s hospitable monarch came;
To thee we now consign the precious load,
The pride of kings, and labour of a god.”

Then gave the cup, while Megapenthe brought
The silver vase with living sculpture wrought.
The beauteous queen, advancing next, display’d
The shining veil, and thus endearing said:

“Accept, dear youth, this monument of love,
Long since, in better days, by Helen wove:
Safe in thy mother’s care the vesture lay,
To deck thy bride and grace thy nuptial day.
Meantime may’st thou with happiest speed regain
Thy stately palace, and thy wide domain.”

She said, and gave the veil; with grateful look
The prince the variegated present took.
And now, when through the royal dome they pass’d,
High on a throne the king each stranger placed.
A golden ewer the attendant damsel brings,
Replete with water from the crystal springs;
With copious streams the shining vase supplies
A silver layer of capacious size.
They wash. The tables in fair order spread,
The glittering canisters are crown’d with bread;
Viands of various kinds allure the taste,
Of choicest sort and savour; rich repast!
Whilst Eteoneus portions out the shares
Atrides’ son the purple draught prepares,
And now (each sated with the genial feast,
And the short rage of thirst and hunger ceased)
Ulysses’ son, with his illustrious friend,
The horses join, the polish’d car ascend,
Along the court the fiery steeds rebound,
And the wide portal echoes to the sound.
The king precedes; a bowl with fragrant wine
(Libation destined to the powers divine)
His right hand held: before the steed he stands,
Then, mix’d with prayers, he utters these commands:

“Farewell, and prosper, youths! let Nestor know
What grateful thoughts still in this bosom glow,
For all the proofs of his paternal care,
Through the long dangers of the ten years’ war.”
“Ah! doubt not our report (the prince rejoin’d)
Of all the virtues of thy generous mind.
And oh! return’d might we Ulysses meet!
To him thy presents show, thy words repeat:
How will each speech his grateful wonder raise!
How will each gift indulge us in thy praise!”

Scarce ended thus the prince, when on the right
Advanced the bird of Jove: auspicious sight!
A milk-white fowl his clinching talons bore,
With care domestic pampered at the floor.
Peasants in vain with threatening cries pursue,
In solemn speed the bird majestic flew
Full dexter to the car; the prosperous sight
Fill’d every breast with wonder and delight.

But Nestor’s son the cheerful silence broke,
And in these words the Spartan chief bespoke:
“Say if to us the gods these omens send,
Or fates peculiar to thyself portend?”

Whilst yet the monarch paused, with doubts oppress’d
The beauteous queen relieved his labouring breast:
“Hear me (she cried), to whom the gods have given
To read this sign, and mystic sense of heaven,
As thus the plumy sovereign of the air
Left on the mountain’s brow his callow care,
And wander’d through the wide ethereal way
To pour his wrath on yon luxurious prey;
So shall thy godlike father, toss’d in vain
Through all the dangers of the boundless main,
Arrive (or if perchance already come)
From slaughter’d gluttons to release the dome.”

“Oh! if this promised bliss by thundering Jove
(The prince replied) stand fix’d in fate above;
To thee, as to some god, I’ll temples raise.
And crown thy altars with the costly blaze.”

He said; and bending o’er his chariot, flung
Athwart the fiery steeds the smarting thong;
The bounding shafts upon the harness play,
Till night descending intercepts the way.
To Diocles at Pherae they repair,
Whose boasted sire was sacred Alpheus’ heir;
With him all night the youthful stranger stay’d,
Nor found the hospitable rites unpaid,
But soon as morning from her orient bed
Had tinged the mountains with her earliest red,
They join’d the steeds, and on the chariot sprung,
The brazen portals in their passage rung.

To Pylos soon they came; when thus begun
To Nestor’s heir Ulysses’ godlike son:

“Let not Pisistratus in vain be press’d,
Nor unconsenting hear his friend’s request;
His friend by long hereditary claim,
In toils his equal, and in years the same.
No farther from our vessel, I implore,
The coursers drive; but lash them to the shore.
Too long thy father would his friend detain;
I dread his proffer’d kindness urged in vain.”

The hero paused, and ponder’d this request,
While love and duty warr’d within his breast.
At length resolved, he turn’d his ready hand,
And lash’d his panting coursers to the strand.
There, while within the poop with care he stored
The regal presents of the Spartan lord,
“With speed begone (said he); call every mate,
Ere yet to Nestor I the tale relate:
’Tis true, the fervour of his generous heart
Brooks no repulse, nor couldst thou soon depart:
Himself will seek thee here, nor wilt thou find,
In words alone, the Pylian monarch kind.
But when, arrived, he thy return shall know
How will his breast with honest fury glow!”
This said, the sounding strokes his horses fire,
And soon he reached the palace of his sire.

“Now (cried Telemachus) with speedy care
Hoist every sail, and every oar prepare.”
Swift as the word his willing mates obey,
And seize their seats, impatient for the sea.

Meantime the prince with sacrifice adores
Minerva, and her guardian aid implores;
When lo! a wretch ran breathless to the shore,
New from his crime; and reeking yet with gore.
A seer he was, from great Melampus sprung,
Melampus, who in Pylos flourish’d long,
Till, urged by wrongs, a foreign realm he chose,
Far from the hateful cause of all his woes.
Neleus his treasures one long year detains,
As long he groan’d in Philacus’s chains:
Meantime, what anguish and what rage combined
For lovely Pero rack’d his labouring mind!
Yet ’scaped he death; and vengeful of his wrong
To Pylos drove the lowing herds along:
Then (Neleus vanquish’d, and consign’d the fair
To Bias’ arms) he so sought a foreign air;
Argos the rich for his retreat he chose,
There form’d his empire; there his palace rose.
From him Antiphates and Mantius came:
The first begot Oicleus great in fame,
And he Amphiaraus, immortal name!
The people’s saviour, and divinely wise,
Beloved by Jove, and him who gilds the skies;
Yet short his date of life! by female pride he dies.
From Mantius Clitus, whom Aurora’s love
Snatch’d for his beauty to the thrones above;
And Polyphides, on whom Phœbus shone
With fullest rays, Amphiaraus now gone;
In Hyperesia’s groves he made abode,
And taught mankind the counsels of the god.
From him sprung Theoclymenus, who found
(The sacred wine yet foaming on the ground)
Telemachus: whom, as to Heaven he press’d
His ardent vows, the stranger thus address’d:

“O thou! that dost thy happy course prepare
With pure libations and with solemn prayer:
By that dread power to whom thy vows are paid;
By all the lives of these; thy own dear head,
Declare sincerely to no foe’s demand
Thy name, thy lineage, and paternal land.”

“Prepare, then (said Telemachus), to know
A tale from falsehood free, not free from woe.
From Ithaca, of royal birth I came,
And great Ulysses (ever honour’d name!)
Once was my sire, though now, for ever lost,
In Stygian gloom he glides a pensive ghost!
Whose fate inquiring through the world we rove;
The last, the wretched proof of filial love.”

The stranger then: “Nor shall I aught conceal,
But the dire secret of my fate reveal.
Of my own tribe an Argive wretch I slew;
Whose powerful friends the luckless deed pursue
With unrelenting rage, and force from home
The blood-stain’d exile, ever doom’d to roam.
But bear, oh bear me o’er yon azure flood;
Receive the suppliant! spare my destined blood!”

“Stranger (replied the prince) securely rest
Affianced in our faith; henceforth our guest.”
Thus affable, Ulysses’ godlike heir
Takes from the stranger’s hand the glittering spear:
He climbs the ship, ascends the stern with haste
And by his side the guest accepted placed.
The chief his order gives: the obedient band,
With due observance wait the chief’s command:
With speed the mast they rear, with speed unbind
The spacious sheet, and stretch it to the wind.
Minerva calls; the ready gales obey
With rapid speed to whirl them o’er the sea.
Crunus they pass’d, next Chalcis roll’d away,
With thickening darkness closed the doubtful day;
The silver Phaea’s glittering rills they lost,
And skimm’d along by Elis’ sacred coast.
Then cautious through the rocky reaches wind,
And turning sudden, shun the death design’d.

Meantime, the king, Eumaeus, and the rest,
Sate in the cottage, at their rural feast:
The banquet pass’d, and satiate every man,
To try his host, Ulysses thus began:

“Yet one night more, my friends, indulge your guest;
The last I purpose in your walls to rest:
To-morrow for myself I must provide,
And only ask your counsel, and a guide;
Patient to roam the street, by hunger led,
And bless the friendly hand that gives me bread.
There in Ulysses’ roof I may relate
Ulysses’ wanderings to his royal mate;
Or, mingling with the suitors’ haughty train,
Not undeserving some support obtain.
Hermes to me his various gifts imparts.
Patron of industry and manual arts:
Few can with me in dexterous works contend,
The pyre to build, the stubborn oak to rend;
To turn the tasteful viand o’er the flame;
Or foam the goblet with a purple stream.
Such are the tasks of men of mean estate,
Whom fortune dooms to serve the rich and great.”

“Alas! (Eumaeus with a sigh rejoin’d).
How sprung a thought so monstrous in thy mind?
If on that godless race thou would’st attend,
Fate owes thee sure a miserable end!
Their wrongs and blasphemies ascend the sky,
And pull descending vengeance from on high.
Not such, my friend, the servants of their feast:
A blooming train in rich embroidery dress’d,
With earth’s whole tribute the bright table bends,
And smiling round celestial youth attends.
Stay, then: no eye askance beholds thee here;
Sweet is thy converse to each social ear;
Well pleased, and pleasing, in our cottage rest,
Till good Telemachus accepts his guest
With genial gifts, and change of fair attires,
And safe conveys thee where thy soul desires.”

To him the man of woes; “O gracious Jove!
Reward this stranger’s hospitable love!
Who knows the son of sorrow to relieve,
Cheers the sad heart, nor lets affliction grieve.
Of all the ills unhappy mortals know,
A life of wanderings is the greatest woe;
On all their weary ways wait care and pain,
And pine and penury, a meagre train.
To such a man since harbour you afford,
Relate the farther fortunes of your lord;
What cares his mother’s tender breast engage,
And sire forsaken on the verge of age;
Beneath the sun prolong they yet their breath,
Or range the house of darkness and of death?”

To whom the swain: “Attend what you enquire;
Laertes lives, the miserable sire,
Lives, but implores of every power to lay
The burden down, and wishes for the day.
Torn from his offspring in the eve of life,
Torn from the embraces of his tender wife,
Sole, and all comfortless, he wastes away
Old age, untimely posting ere his day.
She too, sad mother! for Ulysses lost
Pined out her bloom, and vanish’d to a ghost;
(So dire a fate, ye righteous gods! avert
From every friendly, every feeling heart!)
While yet she was, though clouded o’er with grief.
Her pleasing converse minister’d relief:
With Climene, her youngest daughter, bred,
One roof contain’d us, and one table fed.
But when the softly-stealing pace of time
Crept on from childhood into youthful prime,
To Samos’ isle she sent the wedded fair;
Me to the fields; to tend the rural care;
Array’d in garments her own hands had wove,
Nor less the darling object of her love.
Her hapless death my brighter days o’ercast,
Yet Providence deserts me not at last;
My present labours food and drink procure,
And more, the pleasure to relieve the poor.
Small is the comfort from the queen to hear
Unwelcome news, or vex the royal ear;
Blank and discountenanced the servants stand,
Nor dare to question where the proud command;
No profit springs beneath usurping powers;
Want feeds not there where luxury devours,
Nor harbours charity where riot reigns:
Proud are the lords, and wretched are the swains.”

The suffering chief at this began to melt;
And, “O Eumaeus! thou (he cries) hast felt
The spite of fortune too! her cruel hand
Snatch’d thee an infant from thy native land!
Snatch’d from thy parents’ arms, thy parents’ eyes,
To early wants! a man of miseries!
The whole sad story, from its first, declare:
Sunk the fair city by the rage of war,
Where once thy parents dwelt? or did they keep,
In humbler life, the lowing herds and sheep?
So left perhaps to tend the fleecy train,
Rude pirates seized, and shipp’d thee o’er the main?
Doom’d a fair prize to grace some prince’s board,
The worthy purchase of a foreign lord.”

“If then my fortunes can delight my friend,
A story fruitful of events attend:
Another’s sorrow may thy ears enjoy,
And wine the lengthen’d intervals employ.
Long nights the now declining year bestows;
A part we consecrate to soft repose,
A part in pleasing talk we entertain;
For too much rest itself becomes a pain.
Let those, whom sleep invites, the call obey,
Their cares resuming with the dawning day:
Here let us feast, and to the feast be join’d
Discourse, the sweeter banquet of the mind;
Review the series of our lives, and taste
The melancholy joy of evils pass’d:
For he who much has suffer’d, much will know,
And pleased remembrance builds delight on woe.

“Above Ortygia lies an isle of fame,
Far hence remote, and Syria is the name
(There curious eyes inscribed with wonder trace
The sun’s diurnal, and his annual race);
Not large, but fruitful; stored with grass to keep
The bellowing oxen and the bleating sheep;
Her sloping hills the mantling vines adorn,
And her rich valleys wave with golden corn.
No want, no famine, the glad natives know,
Nor sink by sickness to the shades below;
But when a length of years unnerves the strong,
Apollo comes, and Cynthia comes along.
They bend the silver bow with tender skill,
And, void of pain, the silent arrows kill.
Two equal tribes this fertile land divide,
Where two fair cities rise with equal pride.
But both in constant peace one prince obey,
And Ctesius there, my father, holds the sway.
Freighted, it seems, with toys of every sort,
A ship of Sidon anchor’d in our port;
What time it chanced the palace entertain’d,
Skill’d in rich works, a woman of their land:
This nymph, where anchor’d the Phoenician train,
To wash her robes descending to the main,
A smooth tongued sailor won her to his mind
(For love deceives the best of womankind).
A sudden trust from sudden liking grew;
She told her name, her race, and all she knew,
‘I too (she cried) from glorious Sidon came,
My father Arybas, of wealthy fame:
But, snatch’d by pirates from my native place,
The Taphians sold me to this man’s embrace.’

“‘Haste then (the false designing youth replied),
Haste to thy country; love shall be thy guide;
Haste to thy father’s house, thy father’s breast,
For still he lives, and lives with riches blest.’

“‘Swear first (she cried), ye sailors! to restore
A wretch in safety to her native shore.’
Swift as she ask’d, the ready sailors swore.
She then proceeds: ‘Now let our compact made
Be nor by signal nor by word betray’d,
Nor near me any of your crew descried,
By road frequented, or by fountain side.
Be silence still our guard. The monarch’s spies
(For watchful age is ready to surmise)
Are still at hand; and this, revealed, must be
Death to yourselves, eternal chains to me.
Your vessel loaded, and your traffic pass’d,
Despatch a wary messenger with haste;
Then gold and costly treasures will I bring,
And more, the infant offspring of the king.
Him, child-like wandering forth, I’ll lead away
(A noble prize!) and to your ship convey.’

“Thus spoke the dame, and homeward took the road.
A year they traffic, and their vessel load.
Their stores complete, and ready now to weigh,
A spy was sent their summons to convey:
An artist to my father’s palace came,
With gold and amber chains, elaborate frame:
Each female eye the glittering links employ;
They turn, review, and cheapen every toy.
He took the occasion, as they stood intent,
Gave her the sign, and to his vessel went.
She straight pursued, and seized my willing arm;
I follow’d, smiling, innocent of harm.
Three golden goblets in the porch she found
(The guests not enter’d, but the table crown’d);
Hid in her fraudful bosom these she bore:
Now set the sun, and darken’d all the shore.
Arriving then, where tilting on the tides
Prepared to launch the freighted vessel rides,
Aboard they heave us, mount their decks, and sweep
With level oar along the glassy deep.
Six calmy days and six smooth nights we sail,
And constant Jove supplied the gentle gale.
The seventh, the fraudful wretch (no cause descried),
Touch’d by Diana’s vengeful arrow, died.
Down dropp’d the caitiff-corse, a worthless load,
Down to the deep; there roll’d, the future food
Of fierce sea-wolves, and monsters of the flood.
An helpless infant I remain’d behind;
Thence borne to Ithaca by wave and wind;
Sold to Laertes by divine command,
And now adopted to a foreign land.”

To him the king: “Reciting thus thy cares,
My secret soul in all thy sorrow shares;
But one choice blessing (such is Jove’s high will)
Has sweeten’d all thy bitter draught of ill:
Torn from thy country to no hapless end,
The gods have, in a master, given a friend.
Whatever frugal nature needs is thine
(For she needs little), daily bread and wine.
While I, so many wanderings past, and woes,
Live but on what thy poverty bestows.”

So passed in pleasing dialogue away
The night; then down to short repose they lay;
Till radiant rose the messenger of day.
While in the port of Ithaca, the band
Of young Telemachus approach’d the land;
Their sails they loosed, they lash’d the mast aside,
And cast their anchors, and the cables tied:
Then on the breezy shore, descending, join
In grateful banquet o’er the rosy wine.
When thus the prince: “Now each his course pursue;
I to the fields, and to the city you.
Long absent hence, I dedicate this day
My swains to visit, and the works survey.
Expect me with the morn, to pay the skies
Our debt of safe return in feast and sacrifice.”

Then Theoclymenus: “But who shall lend,
Meantime, protection to thy stranger friend?
Straight to the queen and palace shall I fly,
Or yet more distant, to some lord apply?”

The prince return’d: “Renown’d in days of yore
Has stood our father’s hospitable door;
No other roof a stranger should receive,
No other hands than ours the welcome give.
But in my absence riot fills the place,
Nor bears the modest queen a stranger’s face;
From noiseful revel far remote she flies,
But rarely seen, or seen with weeping eyes.
No—let Eurymachus receive my guest,
Of nature courteous, and by far the best;
He woos the queen with more respectful flame,
And emulates her former husband’s fame,
With what success, ’tis Jove’s alone to know,
And the hoped nuptials turn to joy or woe.”

Thus speaking, on the right up-soar’d in air
The hawk, Apollo’s swift-wing’d messenger:
His dreadful pounces tore a trembling dove;
The clotted feathers, scatter’d from above,
Between the hero and the vessel pour
Thick plumage mingled with a sanguine shower.

The observing augur took the prince aside,
Seized by the hand, and thus prophetic cried:
“Yon bird, that dexter cuts the aërial road,
Rose ominous, nor flies without a god:
No race but thine shall Ithaca obey,
To thine, for ages, Heaven decrees the sway.”

“Succeed the omens, gods! (the youth rejoin’d:)
Soon shall my bounties speak a grateful mind,
And soon each envied happiness attend
The man who calls Telemachus his friend.”
Then to Peiraeus: “Thou whom time has proved
A faithful servant, by thy prince beloved!
Till we returning shall our guest demand,
Accept this charge with honour, at our hand.”

To this Peiraeus: “Joyful I obey,
Well pleased the hospitable rites to pay.
The presence of thy guest shall best reward
(If long thy stay) the absence of my lord.”

With that, their anchors he commands to weigh,
Mount the tall bark, and launch into the sea.
All with obedient haste forsake the shores,
And, placed in order, spread their equal oars.
Then from the deck the prince his sandals takes;
Poised in his hand the pointed javelin shakes.
They part; while, lessening from the hero’s view
Swift to the town the well-row’d galley flew:
The hero trod the margin of the main,
And reach’d the mansion of his faithful swain.





Soon as the morning blush’d along the plains,
Ulysses, and the monarch of the swains,
Awake the sleeping fires, their meals prepare,
And forth to pasture send the bristly care.
The prince’s near approach the dogs descry,
And fawning round his feet confess their joy.
Their gentle blandishment the king survey’d,
Heard his resounding step, and instant said:

“Some well-known friend, Eumaeus, bends this way;
His steps I hear; the dogs familiar play.”

While yet he spoke, the prince advancing drew
Nigh to the lodge, and now appear’d in view.
Transported from his seat Eumaeus sprung,
Dropp’d the full bowl, and round his bosom hung;
Kissing his cheek, his hand, while from his eye
The tears rain’d copious in a shower of joy,
As some fond sire who ten long winters grieves,
From foreign climes an only son receives
(Child of his age), with strong paternal joy,
Forward he springs, and clasps the favourite boy:
So round the youth his arms Eumaeus spread,
As if the grave had given him from the dead.

“And is it thou? my ever-dear delight!
Oh, art thou come to bless my longing sight?
Never, I never hoped to view this day,
When o’er the waves you plough’d the desperate way.
Enter, my child! Beyond my hopes restored,
Oh give these eyes to feast upon their lord.
Enter, oh seldom seen! for lawless powers
Too much detain thee from these sylvan bowers,”
The prince replied: “Eumaeus, I obey;
To seek thee, friend, I hither took my way.
But say, if in the court the queen reside
Severely chaste, or if commenced a bride?”

Thus he; and thus the monarch of the swains:
“Severely chaste Penelope remains;
But, lost to every joy, she wastes the day
In tedious cares, and weeps the night away.”

He ended, and (receiving as they pass
The javelin pointed with a star of brass),
They reach’d the dome; the dome with marble shined.
His seat Ulysses to the prince resign’d.
“Not so (exclaims the prince with decent grace)
For me, this house shall find an humbler place:
To usurp the honours due to silver hairs
And reverend strangers modest youth forbears.”
Instant the swain the spoils of beasts supplies,
And bids the rural throne with osiers rise.
There sate the prince: the feast Eumaeus spread,
And heap’d the shining canisters with bread.
Thick o’er the board the plenteous viands lay,
The frugal remnants of the former day.
Then in a bowl he tempers generous wines,
Around whose verge a mimic ivy twines.
And now, the rage of thirst and hunger fled,
Thus young Ulysses to Eumaeus said:

“Whence, father, from what shore this stranger, say?
What vessel bore him o’er the watery way?
To human step our land impervious lies,
And round the coast circumfluent oceans rise.”

The swain returns: “A tale of sorrows hear:
In spacious Crete he drew his natal air;
Long doom’d to wander o’er the land and main,
For Heaven has wove his thread of life with pain.
Half breathless ’scaping to the land he flew
From Thesprot mariners, a murderous crew.
To thee, my son, the suppliant I resign;
I gave him my protection, grant him thine.”

“Hard task (he cries) thy virtue gives thy friend,
Willing to aid, unable to defend.
Can strangers safely in the court reside,
’Midst the swell’d insolence of lust and pride?
E’en I unsafe: the queen in doubt to wed,
Or pay due honours to the nuptial bed.
Perhaps she weds regardless of her fame,
Deaf to the mighty Ulyssean name.
However, stranger! from our grace receive
Such honours as befit a prince to give;
Sandals, a sword and robes, respect to prove,
And safe to sail with ornaments of love.
Till then, thy guest amid the rural train,
Far from the court, from danger far, detain.
’Tis mine with food the hungry to supply,
And clothe the naked from the inclement sky.
Here dwell in safety from the suitors’ wrongs,
And the rude insults of ungovern’d tongues.
For should’st thou suffer, powerless to relieve,
I must behold it, and can only grieve.
The brave, encompass’d by an hostile train,
O’erpower’d by numbers, is but brave in vain.”

To whom, while anger in his bosom glows,
With warmth replies the man of mighty woes:
“Since audience mild is deign’d, permit my tongue
At once to pity and resent thy wrong.
My heart weeps blood to see a soul so brave
Live to base insolence or power a slave,
But tell me, dost thou, prince, dost thou behold,
And hear their midnight revels uncontroll’d?
Say, do thy subjects in bold faction rise,
Or priests in fabled oracles advise?
Or are thy brothers, who should aid thy power,
Turn’d mean deserters in the needful hour?
Oh that I were from great Ulysses sprung,
Or that these wither’d nerves like thine were strung,
Or, heavens! might he return! (and soon appear
He shall, I trust; a hero scorns despair:)
Might he return, I yield my life a prey
To my worst foe, if that avenging day
Be not their last: but should I lose my life,
Oppress’d by numbers in the glorious strife,
I chose the nobler part, and yield my breath,
Rather than bear dishonor, worse than death;
Than see the hand of violence invade
The reverend stranger and the spotless maid;
Than see the wealth of kings consumed in waste,
The drunkard’s revel, and the gluttons’ feast.”

Thus he, with anger flashing from his eye;
Sincere the youthful hero made reply:
“Nor leagued in factious arms my subjects rise,
Nor priests in fabled oracles advise;
Nor are my brothers, who should aid my power,
Turn’d mean deserters in the needful hour.
Ah me! I boast no brother; heaven’s dread King
Gives from our stock an only branch to spring:
Alone Laertes reign’d Arcesius’ heir,
Alone Ulysses drew the vital air,
And I alone the bed connubial graced,
An unbless’d offspring of a sire unbless’d!
Each neighbouring realm, conducive to our woe,
Sends forth her peers, and every peer a foe:
The court proud Samos and Dulichium fills,
And lofty Zacinth crown’d with shady hills.
E’en Ithaca and all her lords invade
The imperial sceptre, and the regal bed:
The queen, averse to love, yet awed by power,
Seems half to yield, yet flies the bridal hour:
Meantime their licence uncontroll’d I bear;
E’en now they envy me the vital air:
But Heaven will sure revenge, and gods there are.

“But go Eumaeus! to the queen impart
Our safe return, and ease a mother’s heart.
Yet secret go; for numerous are my foes,
And here at least I may in peace repose.”

To whom the swain: “I hear and I obey:
But old Laertes weeps his life away,
And deems thee lost: shall I my speed employ
To bless his age: a messenger of joy?
The mournful hour that tore his son away
Sent the sad sire in solitude to stray;
Yet busied with his slaves, to ease his woe,
He dress’d the vine, and bade the garden blow,
Nor food nor wine refused; but since the day
That you to Pylos plough’d the watery way,
Nor wine nor food he tastes; but, sunk in woes,
Wild springs the vine, no more the garden blows,
Shut from the walks of men, to pleasure lost,
Pensive and pale he wanders half a ghost.”

“Wretched old man! (with tears the prince returns)
Yet cease to go—what man so blest but mourns?
Were every wish indulged by favouring skies,
This hour should give Ulysses to my eyes.
But to the queen with speed dispatchful bear,
Our safe return, and back with speed repair;
And let some handmaid of her train resort
To good Laertes in his rural court.”

While yet he spoke, impatient of delay,
He braced his sandals on, and strode away:
Then from the heavens the martial goddess flies
Through the wild fields of air, and cleaves the skies:
In form, a virgin in soft beauty’s bloom,
Skill’d in the illustrious labours of the loom.
Alone to Ithaca she stood display’d,
But unapparent as a viewless shade
Escaped Telemachus (the powers above,
Seen or unseen, o’er earth at pleasure move):
The dogs intelligent confess’d the tread
Of power divine, and howling, trembling, fled.
The goddess, beckoning, waves her deathless hands:
Dauntless the king before the goddess stands:

“Then why (she said), O favour’d of the skies!
Why to thy godlike son this long disguise?
Stand forth reveal’d; with him thy cares employ
Against thy foes; be valiant and destroy!
Lo! I descend in that avenging hour,
To combat by thy side, thy guardian power.”

She said, and o’er him waves her wand of gold
Imperial robes his manly limbs infold;
At once with grace divine his frame improves;
At once with majesty enlarged he moves:
Youth flush’d his reddening cheek, and from his brows
A length of hair in sable ringlets flows;
His blackening chin receives a deeper shade;
Then from his eyes upsprung the warrior-maid.

The hero reascends: the prince o’erawed
Scarce lifts his eyes, and bows as to a god,
Then with surprise (surprise chastised by fears):
“How art thou changed! (he cried)—a god appears!
Far other vests thy limbs majestic grace,
Far other glories lighten from thy face!
If heaven be thy abode, with pious care,
Lo! I the ready sacrifice prepare:
Lo! gifts of labour’d gold adorn thy shrine,
To win thy grace: O save us, power divine!”

“Few are my days (Ulysses made reply),
Nor I, alas! descendant of the sky.
I am thy father. O my son! my son!
That father, for whose sake thy days have run
One scene of woe! to endless cares consign’d,
And outraged by the wrongs of base mankind.”

Then, rushing to his arms, he kiss’d his boy
With the strong raptures of a parent’s joy.
Tears bathe his cheek, and tears the ground bedew:
He strain’d him close, as to his breast he grew.
“Ah me! (exclaims the prince with fond desire)
Thou art not—no, thou canst not be my sire.
Heaven such illusion only can impose,
By the false joy to aggravate my woes.
Who but a god can change the general doom,
And give to wither’d age a youthful bloom!
Late, worn with years, in weeds obscene you trod;
Now, clothed in majesty, you move a god!”

“Forbear (he cried,) for Heaven reserve that name;
Give to thy father but a father’s claim;
Other Ulysses shalt thou never see,
I am Ulysses, I, my son, am he.
Twice ten sad years o’er earth and ocean toss’d,
’Tis given at length to view my native coast.
Pallas, unconquer’d maid, my frame surrounds
With grace divine: her power admits no bounds;
She o’er my limbs old age and wrinkles shed;
Now strong as youth, magnificent I tread.
The gods with ease frail man depress or raise,
Exalt the lowly, or the proud debase.”

He spoke and sate. The prince with transport flew,
Hung round his neck, while tears his cheek bedew;
Nor less the father pour’d a social flood;
They wept abundant, and they wept aloud.
As the bold eagle with fierce sorrow stung,
Or parent vulture, mourns her ravish’d young;
They cry, they scream, their unfledged brood a prey
To some rude churl, and borne by stealth away:
So they aloud: and tears in tides had run,
Their grief unfinish’d with the setting sun;
But checking the full torrent in its flow,
The prince thus interrupts the solemn woe.
“What ship transported thee, O father, say;
And what bless’d hands have oar’d thee on the way?”

“All, all (Ulysses instant made reply),
I tell thee all, my child, my only joy!
Phæacians bore me to the port assign’d,
A nation ever to the stranger kind;
Wrapp’d in the embrace of sleep, the faithful train
O’er seas convey’d me to my native reign:
Embroider’d vestures, gold, and brass, are laid
Conceal’d in caverns in the sylvan shade.
Hither, intent the rival rout to slay,
And plan the scene of death, I bend my way;
So Pallas wills—but thou, my son, explain
The names and numbers of the audacious train;
’Tis mine to judge if better to employ
Assistant force, or singly to destroy.”

“O’er earth (returns the prince) resounds thy name,
Thy well-tried wisdom, and thy martial fame,
Yet at thy words I start, in wonder lost;
Can we engage, not decades but an host?
Can we alone in furious battle stand,
Against that numerous and determined band?
Hear then their numbers; from Dulichium came
Twice twenty-six, all peers of mighty name.
Six are their menial train: twice twelve the boast
Of Samos; twenty from Zacynthus’ coast:
And twelve our country’s pride; to these belong
Medon and Phemius, skill’d in heavenly song.
Two sewers from day to day the revels wait,
Exact of taste, and serve the feast in state.
With such a foe the unequal fight to try,
Were by false courage unrevenged to die.
Then what assistant powers you boast relate,
Ere yet we mingle in the stern debate.”

“Mark well my voice, (Ulysses straight replies:)
What need of aids, if favour’d by the skies?
If shielded to the dreadful fight we move,
By mighty Pallas, and by thundering Jove?”

“Sufficient they (Telemachus rejoin’d)
Against the banded powers of all mankind:
They, high enthroned above the rolling clouds,
Wither the strength of man, and awe the gods.”

“Such aids expect (he cries,) when strong in might
We rise terrific to the task of fight.
But thou, when morn salutes the aërial plain,
The court revisit and the lawless train:
Me thither in disguise Eumaeus leads,
An aged mendicant in tatter’d weeds.
There, if base scorn insult my reverend age,
Bear it, my son! repress thy rising rage.
If outraged, cease that outrage to repel;
Bear it, my son! howe’er thy heart rebel.
Yet strive by prayer and counsel to restrain
Their lawless insults, though thou strive in vain:
For wicked ears are deaf to wisdom’s call,
And vengeance strikes whom Heaven has doom’d to fall.
Once more attend: when she whose power inspires
The thinking mind, my soul to vengeance fires,
I give the sign: that instant, from beneath,
Aloft convey the instruments of death,
Armour and arms; and, if mistrust arise,
Thus veil the truth in plausible disguise:

“‘These glittering weapons, ere he sail’d to Troy,
Ulysses view’d with stern heroic joy:
Then, beaming o’er the illumined wall they shone;
Now dust dishonours, all their lustre gone.
I bear them hence (so Jove my soul inspires),
From the pollution of the fuming fires;
Lest when the bowl inflames, in vengeful mood
Ye rush to arms, and stain the feast with blood:
Oft ready swords in luckless hour incite
The hand of wrath, and arm it for the fight.’

“Such be the plea, and by the plea deceive:
For Jove infatuates all, and all believe.
Yet leave for each of us a sword to wield,
A pointed javelin, and a fenceful shield.
But by my blood that in thy bosom glows,
By that regard a son his father owes;
The secret, that thy father lives, retain
Lock’d in thy bosom from the household train;
Hide it from all; e’en from Eumaeus hide,
From my dear father, and my dearer bride.
One care remains, to note the loyal few
Whose faith yet lasts among the menial crew;
And noting, ere we rise in vengeance, prove
Who love his prince; for sure you merit love.”

To whom the youth: “To emulate, I aim,
The brave and wise, and my great father’s fame.
But reconsider, since the wisest err,
Vengeance resolved, ’tis dangerous to defer.
What length of time must we consume in vain,
Too curious to explore the menial train!
While the proud foes, industrious to destroy
Thy wealth, in riot the delay enjoy.
Suffice it in this exigence alone
To mark the damsels that attend the throne:
Dispersed the youth reside; their faith to prove
Jove grants henceforth, if thou hast spoke from Jove.”

While in debate they waste the hours away,
The associates of the prince repass’d the bay:
With speed they guide the vessel to the shores;
With speed debarking land the naval stores:
Then, faithful to their charge, to Clytius bear,
And trust the presents to his friendly care.
Swift to the queen a herald flies to impart
Her son’s return, and ease a parent’s heart:
Lest a sad prey to ever-musing cares,
Pale grief destroy what time awhile forbears.
The incautious herald with impatience burns,
And cries aloud, “Thy son, O queen, returns;”
Eumaeus sage approach’d the imperial throne,
And breathed his mandate to her ear alone,
Then measured back the way. The suitor band,
Stung to the soul, abash’d, confounded, stand;
And issuing from the dome, before the gate,
With clouded looks, a pale assembly sate.

At length Eurymachus: “Our hopes are vain;
Telemachus in triumph sails the main.
Haste, rear the mast, the swelling shroud display;
Haste, to our ambush’d friends the news convey!”

Scarce had he spake, when, turning to the strand,
Amphinomus survey’d the associate band;
Full to the bay within the winding shores
With gather’d sails they stood, and lifted oars.
“O friends!” he cried, elate with rising joy,
“See to the port secure the vessel fly!
Some god has told them, or themselves survey
The bark escaped; and measure back their way.”

Swift at the word descending to the shores,
They moor the vessel and unlade the stores:
Then, moving from the strand, apart they sate,
And full and frequent form’d a dire debate.

“Lives then the boy? he lives (Antinous cries),
The care of gods and favourite of the skies.
All night we watch’d, till with her orient wheels
Aurora flamed above the eastern hills,
And from the lofty brow of rocks by day
Took in the ocean with a broad survey
Yet safe he sails; the powers celestial give
To shun the hidden snares of death, and live.
But die he shall, and thus condemn’d to bleed,
Be now the scene of instant death decreed.
Hope ye success? undaunted crush the foe.
Is he not wise? know this, and strike the blow.
Wait ye, till he to arms in council draws
The Greeks, averse too justly to our cause?
Strike, ere, the states convened, the foe betray
Our murderous ambush on the watery way.
Or choose ye vagrant from their rage to fly,
Outcasts of earth, to breathe an unknown sky?
The brave prevent misfortune; then be brave,
And bury future danger in his grave.
Returns he? ambush’d we’ll his walk invade,
Or where he hides in solitude and shade;
And give the palace to the queen a dower,
Or him she blesses in the bridal hour.
But if submissive you resign the sway,
Slaves to a boy, go, flatter and obey.
Retire we instant to our native reign,
Nor be the wealth of kings consumed in vain;
Then wed whom choice approves: the queen be given
To some blest prince, the prince decreed by Heaven.”

Abash’d, the suitor train his voice attends;
Till from his throne Amphinomus ascends,
Who o’er Dulichium stretch’d his spacious reign,
A land of plenty, bless’d with every grain:
Chief of the numbers who the queen address’d,
And though displeasing, yet displeasing least.
Soft were his words; his actions wisdom sway’d;
Graceful awhile he paused, then mildly said:

“O friends, forbear! and be the thought withstood:
’Tis horrible to shed imperial blood!
Consult we first the all-seeing powers above,
And the sure oracles of righteous Jove.
If they assent, e’en by this hand he dies;
If they forbid, I war not with the skies.”

He said: the rival train his voice approved,
And rising instant to the palace moved.
Arrived, with wild tumultuous noise they sate,
Recumbent on the shining thrones of state.

Then Medon, conscious of their dire debates,
The murderous counsel to the queen relates.
Touch’d at the dreadful story, she descends:
Her hasty steps a damsel train attends.
Full where the dome its shining valves expands,
Sudden before the rival powers she stands;
And, veiling, decent, with a modest shade
Her cheek, indignant to Antinous said:

“O void of faith! of all bad men the worst!
Renown’d for wisdom, by the abuse accursed!
Mistaking fame proclaims thy generous mind:
Thy deeds denote thee of the basest kind.
Wretch! to destroy a prince that friendship gives,
While in his guest his murderer he receives;
Nor dread superior Jove, to whom belong
The cause of suppliants, and revenge of wrong.
Hast thou forgot, ungrateful as thou art,
Who saved thy father with a friendly part?
Lawless he ravaged with his martial powers
The Taphian pirates on Thesprotia’s shores;
Enraged, his life, his treasures they demand;
Ulysses saved him from the avenger’s hand.
And would’st thou evil for his good repay?
His bed dishonour, and his house betray?
Afflict his queen, and with a murderous hand
Destroy his heir!—but cease, ’tis I command.”

“Far hence those fears (Eurymachus replied,)
O prudent princess! bid thy soul confide.
Breathes there a man who dares that hero slay,
While I behold the golden light of day?
No: by the righteous powers of heaven I swear,
His blood in vengeance smokes upon my spear.
Ulysses, when my infant days I led,
With wine sufficed me, and with dainties fed:
My generous soul abhors the ungrateful part,
And my friend’s son lives nearest to my heart.
Then fear no mortal arm; if Heaven destroy,
We must resign: for man is born to die.”

Thus smooth he ended, yet his death conspired:
Then sorrowing, with sad step the queen retired,
With streaming eyes, all comfortless deplored,
Touch’d with the dear remembrance of her lord:
Nor ceased till Pallas bids her sorrows fly,
And in soft slumber seal’d her flowing eye.

And now Eumaeus, at the evening hour,
Came late, returning to his sylvan bower.
Ulysses and his son had dress’d with art
A yearling boar, and gave the gods their part.
Holy repast! That instant from the skies
The martial goddess to Ulysses flies:
She waves her golden wand, and reassumes
From every feature every grace that blooms;
At once his vestures change; at once she sheds
Age o’er his limbs, that tremble as he treads:
Lest to the queen the swain with transport fly,
Unable to contain the unruly joy;
When near he drew, the prince breaks forth: “Proclaim
What tidings, friend? what speaks the voice of fame?
Say, if the suitors measure back the main,
Or still in ambush thirst for blood in vain?”

“Whether (he cries) they measure back the flood,
Or still in ambush thirst in vain for blood,
Escaped my care: where lawless suitors sway,
Thy mandate borne my soul disdain’d to stay.
But from the Hermaean height I cast a view,
Where to the port a bark high-bounding flew;
Her freight a shining band: with martial air
Each poised his shield, and each advanced his spear;
And, if aright these searching eyes survey,
The eluded suitors stem the watery way.”

The prince, well pleased to disappoint their wiles,
Steals on his sire a glance, and secret smiles.
And now, a short repast prepared, they fed
Till the keen rage of craving hunger fled:
Then to repose withdrawn, apart they lay,
And in soft sleep forgot the cares of day.






Soon as Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
Sprinkled with roseate light the dewy lawn,
In haste the prince arose, prepared to part;
His hand impatient grasps the pointed dart;
Fair on his feet the polish’d sandals shine,
And thus he greets the master of the swine:

“My friend, adieu! let this short stay suffice;
I haste to meet my mother’s longing eyes,
And end her tears, her sorrows and her sighs.
But thou, attentive, what we order heed:
This hapless stranger to the city lead:
By public bounty let him there be fed,
And bless the hand that stretches forth the bread.
To wipe the tears from all afflicted eyes,
My will may covet, but my power denies.
If this raise anger in the stranger’s thought,
The pain of anger punishes the fault:
The very truth I undisguised declare;
For what so easy as to be sincere?”

To this Ulysses: “What the prince requires
Of swift removal, seconds my desires.
To want like mine the peopled town can yield
More hopes of comfort than the lonely field:
Nor fits my age to till the labour’d lands,
Or stoop to tasks a rural lord demands.
Adieu! but since this ragged garb can bear
So ill the inclemencies of morning air,
A few hours’ space permit me here to stay:
My steps Eumaeus shall to town convey,
With riper beams when Phœbus warms the day.”

Thus he: nor aught Telemachus replied,
But left the mansion with a lofty stride:
Schemes of revenge his pondering breast elate,
Revolving deep the suitors’ sudden fate,
Arriving now before the imperial hall,
He props his spear against the pillar’d wall;
Then like a lion o’er the threshold bounds;
The marble pavement with his steps resounds:
His eye first glanced where Euryclea spreads
With furry spoils of beasts the splendid beds:
She saw, she wept, she ran with eager pace,
And reach’d her master with a long embrace.
All crowded round, the family appears
With wild entrancement, and ecstatic tears.
Swift from above descends the royal fair
(Her beauteous cheeks the blush of Venus wear,
Chasten’d with coy Diana’s pensive air);
Hangs o’er her son, in his embraces dies;
Rains kisses on his neck, his face, his eyes:
Few words she spoke, though much she had to say;
And scarce those few, for tears, could force their way.

“Light of my eyes: he comes! unhoped-for joy!
Has Heaven from Pylos brought my lovely boy?
So snatch’d from all our cares!—Tell, hast thou known
Thy father’s fate, and tell me all thy own.”

“Oh dearest! most revered of womankind!
Cease with those tears to melt a manly mind
(Replied the prince); nor be our fates deplored,
From death and treason to thy arms restored.
Go bathe, and robed in white ascend the towers;
With all thy handmaids thank the immortal powers;
To every god vow hecatombs to bleed.
And call Jove’s vengeance on their guilty deed.
While to the assembled council I repair:
A stranger sent by Heaven attends me there;
My new accepted guest I haste to find,
Now to Peiraeus’ honour’d charge consign’d.”

The matron heard, nor was his word in vain.
She bathed; and, robed in white, with all her train,
To every god vow’d hecatombs to bleed,
And call’d Jove’s vengeance on the guilty deed,
Arm’d with his lance, the prince then pass’d the gate,
Two dogs behind, a faithful guard, await;
Pallas his form with grace divine improves:
The gazing crowd admires him as he moves.
Him, gathering round, the haughty suitors greet
With semblance fair, but inward deep deceit,
Their false addresses, generous, he denied.
Pass’d on, and sate by faithful Mentor’s side;
With Antiphus, and Halitherses sage
(His father’s counsellors, revered for age).
Of his own fortunes, and Ulysses’ fame,
Much ask’d the seniors; till Peiraeus came.
The stranger-guest pursued him close behind;
Whom when Telemachus beheld, he join’d.
He (when Peiraeus ask’d for slaves to bring
The gifts and treasures of the Spartan king)
Thus thoughtful answer’d: “Those we shall not move,
Dark and unconscious of the will of Jove;
We know not yet the full event of all:
Stabb’d in his palace if your prince must fall,
Us, and our house, if treason must o’erthrow,
Better a friend possess them than a foe;
If death to these, and vengeance Heaven decree,
Riches are welcome then, not else, to me.
Till then retain the gifts.”—The hero said,
And in his hand the willing stranger led.
Then disarray’d, the shining bath they sought
(With unguents smooth) of polish’d marble wrought:
Obedient handmaids with assistant toil
Supply the limpid wave, and fragrant oil:
Then o’er their limbs refulgent robes they threw,
And fresh from bathing to their seats withdrew.
The golden ewer a nymph attendant brings,
Replenish’d from the pure translucent springs;
With copious streams that golden ewer supplies
A silver layer of capacious size.
They wash: the table, in fair order spread,
Is piled with viands and the strength of bread.
Full opposite, before the folding gate,
The pensive mother sits in humble state;
Lowly she sate, and with dejected view
The fleecy threads her ivory fingers drew.
The prince and stranger shared the genial feast,
Till now the rage of thirst and hunger ceased.

When thus the queen: “My son! my only friend!
Say, to my mournful couch shall I ascend?
(The couch deserted now a length of years;
The couch for ever water’d with my tears;)
Say, wilt thou not (ere yet the suitor crew
Return, and riot shakes our walls anew),
Say, wilt thou not the least account afford?
The least glad tidings of my absent lord?”

To her the youth. “We reach’d the Pylian plains,
Where Nestor, shepherd of his people, reigns.
All arts of tenderness to him are known,
Kind to Ulysses’ race as to his own;
No father with a fonder grasp of joy
Strains to his bosom his long-absent boy.
But all unknown, if yet Ulysses breathe,
Or glide a spectre in the realms beneath;
For farther search, his rapid steeds transport
My lengthen’d journey to the Spartan court.
There Argive Helen I beheld, whose charms
(So Heaven decreed) engaged the great in arms.
My cause of coming told, he thus rejoin’d;
And still his words live perfect in my mind:

“‘Heavens! would a soft, inglorious, dastard train
An absent hero’s nuptial joys profane
So with her young, amid the woodland shades,
A timorous hind the lion’s court invades,
Leaves in that fatal lair her tender fawns,
And climbs the cliffs, or feeds along the lawns;
Meantime returning, with remorseless sway
The monarch savage rends the panting prey:
With equal fury, and with equal fame,
Shall great Ulysses reassert his claim.
O Jove! supreme! whom men and gods revere;
And thou whose lustre gilds the rolling sphere!
With power congenial join’d, propitious aid
The chief adopted by the martial maid!
Such to our wish the warrior soon restore,
As when, contending on the Lesbian shore,
His prowess Philomelides confess’d,
And loud acclaiming Greeks the victor bless’d:
Then soon the invaders of his bed, and throne,
Their love presumptuous shall by death atone.
Now what you question of my ancient friend,
With truth I answer; thou the truth attend.
Learn what I heard the sea-born seer relate,
Whose eye can pierce the dark recess of fate
Sole in an isle, imprison’d by the main,
The sad survivor of his numerous train,
Ulysses lies; detain’d by magic charms,
And press’d unwilling in Calypso’s arms.
No sailors there, no vessels to convey,
No oars to cut the immeasurable way.’
This told Atrides, and he told no more.
Then safe I voyaged to my native shore.”

He ceased; nor made the pensive queen reply,
But droop’d her head, and drew a secret sigh.
When Theoclymenus the seer began:
“O suffering consort of the suffering man!
What human knowledge could, those kings might tell,
But I the secrets of high heaven reveal.
Before the first of gods be this declared,
Before the board whose blessings we have shared;
Witness the genial rites, and witness all
This house holds sacred in her ample wall!
E’en now, this instant, great Ulysses, laid
At rest, or wandering in his country’s shade,
Their guilty deeds, in hearing, and in view,
Secret revolves; and plans the vengeance due.
Of this sure auguries the gods bestow’d,
When first our vessel anchor’d in your road.”
“Succeed those omens, Heaven! (the queen rejoin’d)
So shall our bounties speak a grateful mind;
And every envied happiness attend
The man who calls Penelope his friend.”
Thus communed they: while in the marble court
(Scene of their insolence) the lords resort:
Athwart the spacious square each tries his art,
To whirl the disk, or aim the missile dart.
Now did the hour of sweet repast arrive,
And from the field the victim flocks they drive:
Medon the herald (one who pleased them best,
And honour’d with a portion of their feast),
To bid the banquet, interrupts their play:
Swift to the hall they haste; aside they lay
Their garments, and succinct the victims slay.
Then sheep, and goats, and bristly porkers bled,
And the proud steer was o’er the marble spread.
While thus the copious banquet they provide,
Along the road, conversing side by side,
Proceed Ulysses and the faithful swain;
When thus Eumaeus, generous and humane:
“To town, observant of our lord’s behest,
Now let us speed; my friend no more my guest!
Yet like myself I wish thee here preferr’d,
Guard of the flock, or keeper of the herd,
But much to raise my master’s wrath I fear;
The wrath of princes ever is severe.
Then heed his will, and be our journey made
While the broad beams of Phœbus are display’d,
Or ere brown evening spreads her chilly shade.”
“Just thy advice (the prudent chief rejoin’d),
And such as suits the dictate of my mind.
Lead on: but help me to some staff to stay
My feeble step, since rugged is the way.”
Across his shoulders then the scrip he flung,
Wide-patch’d, and fasten’d by a twisted thong.
A staff Eumaeus gave. Along the way
Cheerly they fare: behind, the keepers stay:
These with their watchful dogs (a constant guard)
Supply his absence, and attend the herd.
And now his city strikes the monarch’s eyes,
Alas! how changed! a man of miseries;
Propp’d on a staff, a beggar old and bare
In rags dishonest fluttering with the air!
Now pass’d the rugged road, they journey down
The cavern’d way descending to the town,
Where, from the rock, with liquid drops distils
A limpid fount; that spread in parting rills
Its current thence to serve the city brings;
An useful work, adorn’d by ancient kings.
Neritus, Ithacus, Polyctor, there,
In sculptured stone immortalized their care,
In marble urns received it from above,
And shaded with a green surrounding grove;
Where silver alders, in high arches twined,
Drink the cool stream, and tremble to the wind.
Beneath, sequester’d to the nymphs, is seen
A mossy altar, deep embower’d in green;
Where constant vows by travellers are paid,
And holy horrors solemnize the shade.

Here with his goats (not vow’d to sacred fame,
But pamper’d luxury) Melanthius came:
Two grooms attend him. With an envious look
He eyed the stranger, and imperious spoke:

“The good old proverb how this pair fulfil!
One rogue is usher to another still.
Heaven with a secret principle endued
Mankind, to seek their own similitude.
Where goes the swineherd with that ill-look’d guest?
That giant-glutton, dreadful at a feast!
Full many a post have those broad shoulders worn,
From every great man’s gate repulsed with scorn:
To no brave prize aspired the worthless swain,
’Twas but for scraps he ask’d, and ask’d in vain.
To beg, than work, he better understands,
Or we perhaps might take him off thy hands.
For any office could the slave be good,
To cleanse the fold, or help the kids to food.
If any labour those big joints could learn,
Some whey, to wash his bowels, he might earn.
To cringe, to whine, his idle hands to spread,
Is all, by which that graceless maw is fed.
Yet hear me! if thy impudence but dare
Approach yon wall, I prophesy thy fare:
Dearly, full dearly, shalt thou buy thy bread
With many a footstool thundering at thy head.”

He thus: nor insolent of word alone,
Spurn’d with his rustic heel his king unknown;
Spurn’d, but not moved: he like a pillar stood,
Nor stirr’d an inch, contemptuous, from the road:
Doubtful, or with his staff to strike him dead,
Or greet the pavement with his worthless head.
Short was that doubt; to quell his rage inured,
The hero stood self-conquer’d, and endured.
But hateful of the wretch, Eumaeus heaved
His hands obtesting, and this prayer conceived:
“Daughters of Jove! who from the ethereal bowers
Descend to swell the springs, and feed the flowers!
Nymphs of this fountain! to whose sacred names
Our rural victims mount in blazing flames!
To whom Ulysses’ piety preferr’d
The yearly firstlings of his flock and herd;
Succeed my wish, your votary restore:
Oh, be some god his convoy to our shore!
Due pains shall punish then this slave’s offence,
And humble all his airs of insolence,
Who, proudly stalking, leaves the herds at large,
Commences courtier, and neglects his charge.”

“What mutters he? (Melanthius sharp rejoins;)
This crafty miscreant, big with dark designs?
The day shall come—nay, ’tis already near—
When, slave! to sell thee at a price too dear
Must be my care; and hence transport thee o’er,
A load and scandal to this happy shore.
Oh! that as surely great Apollo’s dart,
Or some brave suitor’s sword, might pierce the heart
Of the proud son; as that we stand this hour
In lasting safety from the father’s power!”

So spoke the wretch, but, shunning farther fray,
Turn’d his proud step, and left them on their way.
Straight to the feastful palace he repair’d,
Familiar enter’d, and the banquet shared;
Beneath Eurymachus, his patron lord,
He took his place, and plenty heap’d the board.

Meantime they heard, soft circling in the sky
Sweet airs ascend, and heavenly minstrelsy
(For Phemius to the lyre attuned the strain):
Ulysses hearken’d, then address’d the swain:

“Well may this palace admiration claim,
Great and respondent to the master’s fame!
Stage above stage the imperial structure stands,
Holds the chief honours, and the town commands:
High walls and battlements the courts inclose,
And the strong gates defy a host of foes.
Far other cares its dwellers now employ;
The throng’d assembly and the feast of joy:
I see the smokes of sacrifice aspire,
And hear (what graces every feast) the lyre.”

Then thus Eumaeus: “Judge we which were best;
Amidst yon revellers a sudden guest
Choose you to mingle, while behind I stay?
Or I first entering introduce the way?
Wait for a space without, but wait not long;
This is the house of violence and wrong:
Some rude insult thy reverend age may bear;
For like their lawless lords the servants are.”

“Just is, O friend! thy caution, and address’d
(Replied the chief, to no unheedful breast:)
The wrongs and injuries of base mankind
Fresh to my sense, and always in my mind.
The bravely-patient to no fortune yields:
On rolling oceans, and in fighting fields,
Storms have I pass’d, and many a stern debate;
And now in humbler scene submit to fate.
What cannot want? The best she will expose,
And I am learn’d in all her train of woes;
She fills with navies, hosts, and loud alarms,
The sea, the land, and shakes the world with arms!”

Thus, near the gates conferring as they drew,
Argus, the dog, his ancient master knew:
He not unconscious of the voice and tread,
Lifts to the sound his ear, and rears his head;
Bred by Ulysses, nourish’d at his board,
But, ah! not fated long to please his lord;
To him, his swiftness and his strength were vain;
The voice of glory call’d him o’er the main.
Till then in every sylvan chase renown’d,
With Argus, Argus, rung the woods around;
With him the youth pursued the goat or fawn,
Or traced the mazy leveret o’er the lawn.
Now left to man’s ingratitude he lay,
Unhoused, neglected in the public way;
And where on heaps the rich manure was spread,
Obscene with reptiles, took his sordid bed.

He knew his lord; he knew, and strove to meet;
In vain he strove to crawl and kiss his feet;
Yet (all he could) his tail, his tears, his eyes,
Salute his master, and confess his joys.
Soft pity touch’d the mighty master’s soul;
Adown his cheek a tear unbidden stole,
Stole unperceived: he turn’d his head and dried
The drop humane: then thus impassion’d cried:

“What noble beast in this abandon’d state
Lies here all helpless at Ulysses’ gate?
His bulk and beauty speak no vulgar praise:
If, as he seems, he was in better days,
Some care his age deserves; or was he prized
For worthless beauty? therefore now despised;
Such dogs and men there are, mere things of state;
And always cherish’d by their friends, the great.”

“Not Argus so, (Eumaeus thus rejoin’d,)
But served a master of a nobler kind,
Who, never, never shall behold him more!
Long, long since perish’d on a distant shore!
Oh had you seen him, vigorous, bold, and young,
Swift as a stag, and as a lion strong:
Him no fell savage on the plain withstood,
None ’scaped him bosom’d in the gloomy wood;
His eye how piercing, and his scent how true,
To wind the vapour on the tainted dew!
Such, when Ulysses left his natal coast:
Now years unnerve him, and his lord is lost!
The women keep the generous creature bare,
A sleek and idle race is all their care:
The master gone, the servants what restrains?
Or dwells humanity where riot reigns?
Jove fix’d it certain, that whatever day
Makes man a slave, takes half his worth away.”

This said, the honest herdsman strode before;
The musing monarch pauses at the door:
The dog, whom Fate had granted to behold
His lord, when twenty tedious years had roll’d,
Takes a last look, and having seen him, dies;
So closed for ever faithful Argus’ eyes!

And now Telemachus, the first of all,
Observed Eumaeus entering in the hall;
Distant he saw, across the shady dome;
Then gave a sign, and beckon’d him to come:
There stood an empty seat, where late was placed,
In order due, the steward of the feast,
(Who now was busied carving round the board,)
Eumaeus took, and placed it near his lord.
Before him instant was the banquet spread,
And the bright basket piled with loaves of bread.

Next came Ulysses lowly at the door,
A figure despicable, old, and poor.
In squalid vests, with many a gaping rent,
Propp’d on a staff, and trembling as he went.
Then, resting on the threshold of the gate,
Against a cypress pillar lean’d his weight
Smooth’d by the workman to a polish’d plane);
The thoughtful son beheld, and call’d his swain

“These viands, and this bread, Eumaeus! bear,
And let yon mendicant our plenty share:
And let him circle round the suitors’ board,
And try the bounty of each gracious lord.
Bold let him ask, encouraged thus by me:
How ill, alas! do want and shame agree!”

His lord’s command the faithful servant bears:
The seeming beggar answers with his prayers:
“Bless’d be Telemachus! in every deed
Inspire him. Jove! in every wish succeed!”
This said, the portion from his son convey’d
With smiles receiving on his scrip he laid.
Long has the minstrel swept the sounding wire,
He fed, and ceased when silence held the lyre.
Soon as the suitors from the banquet rose,
Minerva prompts the man of mighty woes
To tempt their bounties with a suppliant’s art,
And learn the generous from the ignoble heart
(Not but his soul, resentful as humane,
Dooms to full vengeance all the offending train);
With speaking eyes, and voice of plaintive sound,
Humble he moves, imploring all around.
The proud feel pity, and relief bestow,
With such an image touch’d of human woe;
Inquiring all, their wonder they confess,
And eye the man, majestic in distress.

While thus they gaze and question with their eyes,
The bold Melanthius to their thought replies:
“My lords! this stranger of gigantic port
The good Eumaeus usher’d to your court.
Full well I mark’d the features of his face,
Though all unknown his clime, or noble race.”

“And is this present, swineherd! of thy band?
Bring’st thou these vagrants to infest the land?
(Returns Antinous with retorted eye)
Objects uncouth, to check the genial joy.
Enough of these our court already grace;
Of giant stomach, and of famish’d face.
Such guests Eumaeus to his country brings,
To share our feast, and lead the life of kings.”

To whom the hospitable swain rejoins:
“Thy passion, prince, belies thy knowing mind.
Who calls, from distant nations to his own,
The poor, distinguish’d by their wants alone?
Round the wide world are sought those men divine
Who public structures raise, or who design;
Those to whose eyes the gods their ways reveal,
Or bless with salutary arts to heal;
But chief to poets such respect belongs,
By rival nations courted for their songs;
These states invite, and mighty kings admire,
Wide as the sun displays his vital fire.
It is not so with want! how few that feed
A wretch unhappy, merely for his need!
Unjust to me, and all that serve the state,
To love Ulysses is to raise thy hate.
For me, suffice the approbation won
Of my great mistress, and her godlike son.”

To him Telemachus: “No more incense
The man by nature prone to insolence:
Injurious minds just answers but provoke”—
Then turning to Antinous, thus he spoke:
“Thanks to thy care! whose absolute command
Thus drives the stranger from our court and land.
Heaven bless its owner with a better mind!
From envy free, to charity inclined.
This both Penelope and I afford:
Then, prince! be bounteous of Ulysses’ board.
To give another’s is thy hand so slow?
So much more sweet to spoil than to bestow?”

“Whence, great Telemachus! this lofty strain?
(Antinous cries with insolent disdain):
Portions like mine if every suitor gave,
Our walls this twelvemonth should not see the slave.”

He spoke, and lifting high above the board
His ponderous footstool, shook it at his lord.
The rest with equal hand conferr’d the bread:
He fill’d his scrip, and to the threshold sped;
But first before Antinous stopp’d, and said:
“Bestow, my friend! thou dost not seem the worst
Of all the Greeks, but prince-like and the first;
Then, as in dignity, be first in worth,
And I shall praise thee through the boundless earth.
Once I enjoy’d in luxury of state
Whate’er gives man the envied name of great;
Wealth, servants, friends, were mine in better days
And hospitality was then my praise;
In every sorrowing soul I pour’d delight,
And poverty stood smiling in my sight.
But Jove, all-governing, whose only will
Determines fate, and mingles good with ill,
Sent me (to punish my pursuit of gain)
With roving pirates o’er the Egyptian main
By Egypt’s silver flood our ships we moor;
Our spies commission’d straight the coast explore;
But impotent of mind, the lawless will
The country ravage, and the natives kill.
The spreading clamour to their city flies,
And horse and foot in mingled tumults rise:
The reddening dawn reveals the hostile fields,
Horrid with bristly spears, and gleaming shields:
Jove thunder’d on their side: our guilty head
We turn’d to flight; the gathering vengeance spread
On all parts round, and heaps on heaps lay dead.
Some few the foe in servitude detain;
Death ill exchanged for bondage and for pain!
Unhappy me a Cyprian took aboard,
And gave to Dmetor, Cyprus’ haughty lord:
Hither, to ’scape his chains, my course I steer,
Still cursed by Fortune, and insulted here!”

To whom Antinous thus his rage express’d:
“What god has plagued us with this gourmand guest?
Unless at distance, wretch! thou keep behind,
Another isle, than Cyprus more unkind,
Another Egypt shalt thou quickly find.
From all thou begg’st, a bold audacious slave;
Nor all can give so much as thou canst crave.
Nor wonder I, at such profusion shown;
Shameless they give, who give what’s not their own.”

The chief, retiring: “Souls, like that in thee,
Ill suits such forms of grace and dignity.
Nor will that hand to utmost need afford
The smallest portion of a wasteful board,
Whose luxury whole patrimonies sweeps,
Yet starving want, amidst the riot, weeps.”

The haughty suitor with resentment burns,
And, sourly smiling, this reply returns:
“Take that, ere yet thou quit this princely throng;
And dumb for ever be thy slanderous tongue!”
He said, and high the whirling tripod flung.
His shoulder-blade received the ungentle shock;
He stood, and moved not, like a marble rock;
But shook his thoughtful head, nor more complain’d,
Sedate of soul, his character sustain’d,
And inly form’d revenge; then back withdrew:
Before his feet the well fill’d scrip he threw,
And thus with semblance mild address’d the crew:

“May what I speak your princely minds approve,
Ye peers and rivals in this noble love!
Not for the hurt I grieve, but for the cause.
If, when the sword our country’s quarrel draws,
Or if, defending what is justly dear,
From Mars impartial some broad wound we bear,
The generous motive dignifies the scar.
But for mere want, how hard to suffer wrong!
Want brings enough of other ills along!
Yet, if injustice never be secure,
If fiends revenge, and gods assert the poor,
Death shall lay low the proud aggressor’s head,
And make the dust Antinous’ bridal bed.”

“Peace, wretch! and eat thy bread without offence
(The suitor cried), or force shall drag thee hence,
Scourge through the public street, and cast thee there,
A mangled carcase for the hounds to tear.”

His furious deed the general anger moved,
All, even the worst, condemn’d; and some reproved.
“Was ever chief for wars like these renown’d?
Ill fits the stranger and the poor to wound.
Unbless’d thy hand! if in this low disguise
Wander, perhaps, some inmate of the skies;
They (curious oft of mortal actions) deign
In forms like these to round the earth and main,
Just and unjust recording in their mind,
And with sure eyes inspecting all mankind.”

Telemachus, absorb’d in thought severe,
Nourish’d deep anguish, though he shed no tear;
But the dark brow of silent sorrow shook:
While thus his mother to her virgins spoke:

“On him and his may the bright god of day
That base, inhospitable blow repay!”
The nurse replies: “If Jove receives my prayer,
Not one survives to breathe to-morrow’s air.”

“All, all are foes, and mischief is their end;
Antinous most to gloomy death a friend
(Replies the queen): the stranger begg’d their grace,
And melting pity soften’d every face;
From every other hand redress he found,
But fell Antinous answer’d with a wound.”
Amidst her maids thus spoke the prudent queen,
Then bade Eumaeus call the pilgrim in.
“Much of the experienced man I long to hear,
If or his certain eye, or listening ear,
Have learn’d the fortunes of my wandering lord?”
Thus she, and good Eumaeus took the word:

“A private audience if thy grace impart,
The stranger’s words may ease the royal heart.
His sacred eloquence in balm distils,
And the soothed heart with secret pleasure fills.
Three days have spent their beams, three nights have run
Their silent journey, since his tale begun,
Unfinish’d yet; and yet I thirst to hear!
As when some heaven-taught poet charms the ear
(Suspending sorrow with celestial strain
Breathed from the gods to soften human pain)
Time steals away with unregarded wing,
And the soul hears him, though he cease to sing

“Ulysses late he saw, on Cretan ground
(His fathers guest), for Minos’ birth renown’d.
He now but waits the wind to waft him o’er,
With boundless treasure, from Thesprotia’s shore.”

To this the queen: “The wanderer let me hear,
While yon luxurious race indulge their cheer,
Devour the grazing ox, and browsing goat,
And turn my generous vintage down their throat.
For where’s an arm, like thine, Ulysses! strong,
To curb wild riot, and to punish wrong?”

She spoke. Telemachus then sneezed aloud;
Constrain’d, his nostril echoed through the crowd.
The smiling queen the happy omen bless’d:

“So may these impious fall, by Fate oppress’d!”
Then to Eumaeus: “Bring the stranger, fly!
And if my questions meet a true reply,
Graced with a decent robe he shall retire,
A gift in season which his wants require.”

Thus spoke Penelope. Eumaeus flies
In duteous haste, and to Ulysses cries:
“The queen invites thee, venerable guest!
A secret instinct moves her troubled breast,
Of her long absent lord from thee to gain
Some light, and soothe her soul’s eternal pain.
If true, if faithful thou, her grateful mind
Of decent robes a present has design’d:
So finding favour in the royal eye,
Thy other wants her subjects shall supply.”

“Fair truth alone (the patient man replied)
My words shall dictate, and my lips shall guide.
To him, to me, one common lot was given,
In equal woes, alas! involved by Heaven.
Much of his fates I know; but check’d by fear
I stand; the hand of violence is here:
Here boundless wrongs the starry skies invade,
And injured suppliants seek in vain for aid.
Let for a space the pensive queen attend,
Nor claim my story till the sun descend;
Then in such robes as suppliants may require,
Composed and cheerful by the genial fire,
When loud uproar and lawless riot cease,
Shall her pleased ear receive my words in peace.”

Swift to the queen returns the gentle swain:
“And say (she cries), does fear or shame detain
The cautious stranger? With the begging kind
Shame suits but ill.” Eumaeus thus rejoin’d:

“He only asks a more propitious hour,
And shuns (who would not?) wicked men in power;
At evening mild (meet season to confer)
By turns to question, and by turns to hear.”

“Whoe’er this guest (the prudent queen replies)
His every step and every thought is wise.
For men like these on earth he shall not find
In all the miscreant race of human kind.”
Thus she. Eumaeus all her words attends,
And, parting, to the suitor powers descends;
There seeks Telemachus, and thus apart
In whispers breathes the fondness of his heart:

“The time, my lord, invites me to repair
Hence to the lodge; my charge demands my care.
These sons of murder thirst thy life to take;
O guard it, guard it, for thy servant’s sake!”

“Thanks to my friend (he cries): but now the hour
Of night draws on, go seek the rural bower:
But first refresh: and at the dawn of day
Hither a victim to the gods convey.
Our life to Heaven’s immortal powers we trust,
Safe in their care, for Heaven protects the just.”

Observant of his voice, Eumaeus sate
And fed recumbent on a chair of state.
Then instant rose, and as he moved along,
’Twas riot all amid the suitor throng,
They feast, they dance, and raise the mirthful song
Till now, declining towards the close of day,
The sun obliquely shot his dewy ray.







While fix’d in thought the pensive hero sate,
A mendicant approach’d the royal gate;
A surly vagrant of the giant kind,
The stain of manhood, of a coward mind:
From feast to feast, insatiate to devour,
He flew, attendant on the genial hour.
Him on his mother’s knees, when babe he lay,
She named Arnaeus on his natal day:
But Irus his associates call’d the boy,
Practised the common messenger to fly;
Irus, a name expressive of the employ.

From his own roof, with meditated blows,
He strove to drive the man of mighty woes:

“Hence, dotard! hence, and timely speed thy way,
Lest dragg’d in vengeance thou repent thy stay;
See how with nods assent yon princely train!
But honouring age, in mercy I refrain:
In peace away! lest, if persuasions fail,
This arm with blows more eloquent prevail.”
To whom, with stern regard: “O insolence,
Indecently to rail without offence!
What bounty gives without a rival share;
I ask, what harms not thee, to breathe this air:
Alike on alms we both precarious live:
And canst thou envy when the great relieve?
Know, from the bounteous heavens all riches flow,
And what man gives, the gods by man bestow;
Proud as thou art, henceforth no more be proud,
Lest I imprint my vengeance in thy blood;
Old as I am, should once my fury burn,
How would’st thou fly, nor e’en in thought return!”

“Mere woman-glutton! (thus the churl replied;)
A tongue so flippant, with a throat so wide!
Why cease I, gods! to dash those teeth away,
Like some wild boar’s, that, greedy of his prey,
Uproots the bearded corn? Rise, try the fight,
Gird well thy loins, approach, and feel my might:
Sure of defeat, before the peers engage:
Unequal fight, when youth contends with age!”

Thus in a wordy war their tongues display
More fierce intents, preluding to the fray;
Antinous hears, and in a jovial vein,
Thus with loud laughter to the suitor train:

“This happy day in mirth, my friends, employ,
And lo! the gods conspire to crown our joy;
See ready for the fight, and hand to hand,
Yon surly mendicants contentious stand:
Why urge we not to blows!” Well pleased they spring
Swift from their seats, and thickening form a ring.

To whom Antinous: “Lo! enrich’d with blood,
A kid’s well-fatted entrails (tasteful food)
On glowing embers lie; on him bestow
The choicest portion who subdues his foe;
Grant him unrivall’d in these walls to stay,
The sole attendant on the genial day.”

The lords applaud: Ulysses then with art,
And fears well-feign’d, disguised his dauntless heart.

“Worn as I am with age, decay’d with woe;
Say, is it baseness to decline the foe?
Hard conflict! when calamity and age
With vigorous youth, unknown to cares, engage!
Yet, fearful of disgrace, to try the day
Imperious hunger bids, and I obey;
But swear, impartial arbiters of right,
Swear to stand neutral, while we cope in fight.”

The peers assent: when straight his sacred head
Telemachus upraised, and sternly said:
“Stranger, if prompted to chastise the wrong
Of this bold insolent, confide, be strong!
The injurious Greek that dares attempt a blow,
That instant makes Telemachus his foe;
And these my friends shall guard the sacred ties
Of hospitality, for they are wise.”

Then, girding his strong loins, the king prepares
To close in combat, and his body bares;
Broad spread his shoulders, and his nervous thighs
By just degrees, like well-turn’d columns, rise
Ample his chest, his arms are round and long,
And each strong joint Minerva knits more strong
(Attendant on her chief): the suitor-crowd
With wonder gaze, and gazing speak aloud:
“Irus! alas! shall Irus be no more?
Black fate impends, and this the avenging hour!
Gods! how his nerves a matchless strength proclaim,
Swell o’er his well-strong limbs, and brace his frame!”

Then pale with fears, and sickening at the sight;
They dragg’d the unwilling Irus to the fight;
From his blank visage fled the coward blood,
And his flesh trembled as aghast he stood.

“O that such baseness should disgrace the light?
O hide it, death, in everlasting night!
(Exclaims Antinous;) can a vigorous foe
Meanly decline to combat age and woe?
But hear me wretch! if recreant in the fray
That huge bulk yield this ill-contested day,
Instant thou sail’st, to Eschetus resign’d;
A tyrant, fiercest of the tyrant kind,
Who casts thy mangled ears and nose a prey
To hungry dogs, and lops the man away.”

While with indignant scorn he sternly spoke,
In every joint the trembling Irus shook.
Now front to front each frowning champion stands,
And poises high in air his adverse hands.
The chief yet doubts, or to the shades below
To fell the giant at one vengeful blow,
Or save his life, and soon his life to save
The king resolves, for mercy sways the brave
That instant Irus his huge arm extends,
Full on his shoulder the rude weight descends;
The sage Ulysses, fearful to disclose
The hero latent in the man of woes,
Check’d half his might; yet rising to the stroke,
His jawbone dash’d, the crashing jawbone broke:
Down dropp’d he stupid from the stunning wound;
His feet extended quivering, beat the ground;
His mouth and nostrils spout a purple flood;
His teeth, all shatter’d, rush inmix’d with blood.

The peers transported, as outstretch’d he lies,
With bursts of laughter rend the vaulted skies;
Then dragg’d along, all bleeding from the wound,
His length of carcase trailing prints the ground:
Raised on his feet, again he reels, he falls,
Till propp’d, reclining on the palace walls:
Then to his hand a staff the victor gave,
And thus with just reproach address’d the slave:
“There terrible, affright with dogs, and reign
A dreaded tyrant o’er the bestial train!
But mercy to the poor and stranger show,
Lest Heaven in vengeance send some mightier woe.”

Scornful he spoke, and o’er his shoulder flung
The broad-patch’d scrip in tatters hung
Ill join’d, and knotted to a twisted thong.
Then, turning short, disdain’d a further stay;
But to the palace measured back the way.
There, as he rested gathering in a ring,
The peers with smiles address’d their unknown king:
“Stranger, may Jove and all the aërial powers
With every blessing crown thy happy hours!
Our freedom to thy prowess’d arm we owe
From bold intrusion of thy coward foe:
Instant the flying sail the slave shall wing
To Eschetus, the monster of a king.”

While pleased he hears, Antinous bears the food,
A kid’s well-fatted entrails, rich with blood;
The bread from canisters of shining mould
Amphinomus; and wines that laugh in gold:
“And oh! (he mildly cries) may Heaven display
A beam of glory o’er thy future day!
Alas, the brave too oft is doom’d to bear
The gripes of poverty and stings of care.”

To whom with thought mature the king replies:
“The tongue speaks wisely, when the soul is wise:
Such was thy father! in imperial state,
Great without vice, that oft attends the great;
Nor from the sire art thou, the son, declin’d;
Then hear my words, and grace them in thy mind!
Of all that breathes, or grovelling creeps on earth,
Most vain is man! calamitous by birth:
To-day, with power elate, in strength he blooms;
The haughty creature on that power presumes:
Anon from Heaven a sad reverse he feels:
Untaught to bear, ’gainst Heaven the wretch rebels.
For man is changeful, as his bliss or woe!
Too high when prosperous, when distress’d too low.
There was a day, when with the scornful great
I swell’d in pomp and arrogance of state;
Proud of the power that to high birth belongs;
And used that power to justify my wrongs.
Then let not man be proud; but firm of mind,
Bear the best humbly; and the worst resign’d;
Be dumb when Heaven afflicts! unlike yon train
Of haughty spoilers, insolently vain;
Who make their queen and all her wealth a prey:
But vengeance and Ulysses wing their way.
O may’st thou, favour’d by some guardian power,
Far, far be distant in that deathful hour!
For sure I am, if stern Ulysses breathe,
These lawless riots end in blood and death.”

Then to the gods the rosy juice he pours,
And the drain’d goblet to the chief restores.
Stung to the soul, o’ercast with holy dread,
He shook the graceful honours of his head;
His boding mind the future woe forestalls,
In vain! by great Telemachus he falls,
For Pallas seals his doom: all sad he turns
To join the peers; resumes his throne, and mourns.

Meanwhile Minerva with instinctive fires
Thy soul, Penelope, from Heaven inspires;
With flattering hopes the suitors to betray,
And seem to meet, yet fly, the bridal day:
Thy husband’s wonder, and thy son’s to raise;
And crown the mother and the wife with praise.
Then, while the streaming sorrow dims her eyes,
Thus, with a transient smile, the matron cries:

“Eurynome! to go where riot reigns
I feel an impulse, though my soul disdains;
To my loved son the snares of death to show,
And in the traitor friend, unmask the foe;
Who, smooth of tongue, in purpose insincere,
Hides fraud in smiles, while death is ambush’d there.”

“Go, warn thy son, nor be the warning vain
(Replied the sagest of the royal train);
But bathed, anointed, and adorn’d, descend;
Powerful of charms, bid every grace attend;
The tide of flowing tears awhile suppress;
Tears but indulge the sorrow, not repress.
Some joy remains: to thee a son is given,
Such as, in fondness, parents ask of Heaven.”

“Ah me! forbear!” returns the queen, “forbear,
Oh! talk not, talk not of vain beauty’s care;
No more I bathe, since he no longer sees
Those charms, for whom alone I wish to please.
The day that bore Ulysses from this coast
Blasted the little bloom these cheeks could boast.
But instant bid Autonoe descend,
Instant Hippodame our steps attend;
Ill suits it female virtue, to be seen
Alone, indecent, in the walks of men.”

Then while Eurynome the mandate bears,
From heaven Minerva shoots with guardian cares;
O’er all her senses, as the couch she press’d,
She pours, a pleasing, deep and death-like rest,
With every beauty every feature arms,
Bids her cheeks glow, and lights up all her charms;
In her love-darting eyes awakes the fires
(Immortal gifts! to kindle soft desires);
From limb to limb an air majestic sheds,
And the pure ivory o’er her bosom spreads.
Such Venus shines, when with a measured bound
She smoothly gliding swims the harmonious round,
When with the Graces in the dance she moves,
And fires the gazing gods with ardent loves.

Then to the skies her flight Minerva bends,
And to the queen the damsel train descends;
Waked at their steps, her flowing eyes unclose;
The tears she wipes, and thus renews her woes:
“Howe’er ’tis well that sleep awhile can free,
With soft forgetfulness a wretch like me;
Oh! were it given to yield this transient breath,
Send, O Diana! send the sleep of death!
Why must I waste a tedious life in tears,
Nor bury in the silent grave my cares?
O my Ulysses! ever honour’d name!
For thee I mourn till death dissolves my frame.”

Thus wailing, slow and sadly she descends,
On either band a damsel train attends:
Full where the dome its shining valves expands,
Radiant before the gazing peers she stands;
A veil translucent o’er her brow display’d,
Her beauty seems, and only seems, to shade:
Sudden she lightens in their dazzled eyes,
And sudden flames in every bosom rise;
They send their eager souls with every look.
Till silence thus the imperial matron broke:

“O why! my son, why now no more appears
That warmth of soul that urged thy younger years?
Thy riper days no growing worth impart,
A man in stature, still a boy in heart!
Thy well-knit frame unprofitably strong,
Speaks thee a hero, from a hero sprung:
But the just gods in vain those gifts bestow,
O wise alone in form, and grave in show!
Heavens! could a stranger feel oppression’s hand
Beneath thy roof, and couldst thou tamely stand!
If thou the stranger’s righteous cause decline
His is the sufferance, but the shame is thine.”

To whom, with filial awe, the prince returns:
“That generous soul with just resentment burns;
Yet, taught by time, my heart has learn’d to glow
For others’ good, and melt at others’ woe;
But, impotent those riots to repel,
I bear their outrage, though my soul rebel;
Helpless amid the snares of death I tread,
And numbers leagued in impious union dread;
But now no crime is theirs: this wrong proceeds
From Irus, and the guilty Irus bleeds.
Oh would to Jove! or her whose arms display
The shield of Jove, or him who rules the day!
That yon proud suitors, who licentious tread
These courts, within these courts like Irus bled:
Whose loose head tottering, as with wine oppress’d,
Obliquely drops, and nodding knocks his breast;
Powerless to move, his staggering feet deny
The coward wretch the privilege to fly.”

Then to the queen Eurymachus replies:
“O justly loved, and not more fair than wise!
Should Greece through all her hundred states survey
Thy finish’d charms, all Greece would own thy sway
In rival crowds contest the glorious prize.
Dispeopling realms to gaze upon thy eyes:
O woman! loveliest of the lovely kind,
In body perfect, and complete in mind.”

“Ah me! (returns the queen) when from this shore
Ulysses sail’d, then beauty was no more!
The gods decreed these eyes no more should keep
Their wonted grace, but only serve to weep.
Should he return, whate’er my beauties prove,
My virtues last; my brightest charm is love.
Now, grief, thou all art mine! the gods o’ercast
My soul with woes, that long, ah long must last!
Too faithfully my heart retains the day
That sadly tore my royal lord away:
He grasp’d my hand, and, ‘O, my spouse! I leave
Thy arms (he cried), perhaps to find a grave:
Fame speaks the Trojans bold; they boast the skill
To give the feather’d arrow wings to kill,
To dart the spear, and guide the rushing car
With dreadful inroad through the walks of war.
My sentence is gone forth, and ’tis decreed
Perhaps by righteous Heaven that I must bleed!
My father, mother, all I trust to three;
To them, to them, transfer the love of me:
But, when my son grows man, the royal sway
Resign, and happy be thy bridal day!’
Such were his words; and Hymen now prepares
To light his torch, and give me up to cares;
The afflictive hand of wrathful Jove to bear:
A wretch the most complete that breathes the air!
Fall’n e’en below the rights to woman due!
Careless to please, with insolence ye woo!
The generous lovers, studious to succeed,
Bid their whole herds and flocks in banquets bleed;
By precious gifts the vow sincere display:
You, only you, make her ye love your prey.”

Well-pleased Ulysses hears his queen deceive
The suitor-train, and raise a thirst to give:
False hopes she kindles, but those hopes betray,
And promise, yet elude, the bridal day.

While yet she speaks, the gay Antinous cries:
“Offspring of kings, and more than woman wise!
’Tis right; ’tis man’s prerogative to give,
And custom bids thee without shame receive;
Yet never, never, from thy dome we move,
Till Hymen lights the torch of spousal love.”

The peers despatch’d their heralds to convey
The gifts of love; with speed they take the way.
A robe Antinous gives of shining dyes,
The varying hues in gay confusion rise
Rich from the artist’s hand! Twelve clasps of gold
Close to the lessening waist the vest infold!
Down from the swelling loins the vest unbound
Floats in bright waves redundant o’er the ground,
A bracelet rich with gold, with amber gay,
That shot effulgence like the solar ray,
Eurymachus presents: and ear-rings bright,
With triple stars, that cast a trembling light.
Pisander bears a necklace wrought with art:
And every peer, expressive of his heart,
A gift bestows: this done, the queen ascends,
And slow behind her damsel train attends.

Then to the dance they form the vocal strain,
Till Hesperus leads forth the starry train;
And now he raises, as the daylight fades,
His golden circlet in the deepening shades:
Three vases heap’d with copious fires display
O’er all the palace a fictitious day;
From space to space the torch wide-beaming burns,
And sprightly damsels trim the rays by turns.

To whom the king: “Ill suits your sex to stay
Alone with men! ye modest maids, away!
Go, with the queen; the spindle guide; or cull
(The partners of her cares) the silver wool;
Be it my task the torches to supply
E’en till the morning lamp adorns the sky;
E’en till the morning, with unwearied care,
Sleepless I watch; for I have learn’d to bear.”

Scornful they heard: Melantho, fair and young,
(Melantho, from the loins of Dolius sprung,
Who with the queen her years an infant led,
With the soft fondness of a daughter bred,)
Chiefly derides: regardless of the cares
Her queen endures, polluted joys she shares
Nocturnal with Eurymachus: with eyes
That speak disdain, the wanton thus replies:
“Oh! whither wanders thy distemper’d brain,
Thou bold intruder on a princely train?
Hence, to the vagrants’ rendezvous repair;
Or shun in some black forge the midnight air.
Proceeds this boldness from a turn of soul,
Or flows licentious from the copious bowl?
Is it that vanquish’d Irus swells thy mind?
A foe may meet thee of a braver kind,
Who, shortening with a storm of blows thy stay,
Shall send thee howling all in blood away!”

To whom with frowns: “O impudent in wrong!
Thy lord shall curb that insolence of tongue;
Know, to Telemachus I tell the offence;
The scourge, the scourge shall lash thee into sense.”

With conscious shame they hear the stern rebuke,
Nor longer durst sustain the sovereign look.

Then to the servile task the monarch turns
His royal hands: each torch refulgent burns
With added day: meanwhile in museful mood,
Absorb’d in thought, on vengeance fix’d he stood.
And now the martial maid, by deeper wrongs
To rouse Ulysses, points the suitors’ tongues:
Scornful of age, to taunt the virtuous man,
Thoughtless and gay, Eurymachus began:

“Hear me (he cries), confederates and friends!
Some god, no doubt, this stranger kindly sends;
The shining baldness of his head survey,
It aids our torchlight, and reflects the ray.”

Then to the king that levell’d haughty Troy:
“Say, if large hire can tempt thee to employ
Those hands in work; to tend the rural trade,
To dress the walk, and form the embowering shade.
So food and raiment constant will I give:
But idly thus thy soul prefers to live,
And starve by strolling, not by work to thrive.”

To whom incensed: “Should we, O prince, engage
In rival tasks beneath the burning rage
Of summer suns; were both constrain’d to wield
Foodless the scythe along the burden’d field;
Or should we labour while the ploughshare wounds,
With steers of equal strength, the allotted grounds,
Beneath my labours, how thy wondering eyes
Might see the sable field at once arise!
Should Jove dire war unloose, with spear and shield,
And nodding helm, I tread the ensanguined field,
Fierce in the van: then wouldst thou, wouldst thou,—say,—
Misname me glutton, in that glorious day?
No, thy ill-judging thoughts the brave disgrace
’Tis thou injurious art, not I am base.
Proud to seem brave among a coward train!
But now, thou art not valorous, but vain.
God! should the stern Ulysses rise in might,
These gates would seem too narrow for thy flight.”

While yet he speaks, Eurymachus replies,
With indignation flashing from his eyes:

“Slave, I with justice might deserve the wrong,
Should I not punish that opprobrious tongue.
Irreverent to the great, and uncontroll’d,
Art thou from wine, or innate folly, bold?
Perhaps these outrages from Irus flow,
A worthless triumph o’er a worthless foe!”

He said, and with full force a footstool threw;
Whirl’d from his arm, with erring rage it flew:
Ulysses, cautious of the vengeful foe,
Stoops to the ground, and disappoints the blow.
Not so a youth, who deals the goblet round,
Full on his shoulder it inflicts a wound;
Dash’d from his hand the sounding goblet flies,
He shrieks, he reels, he falls, and breathless lies.
Then wild uproar and clamour mount the sky,
Till mutual thus the peers indignant cry:
“Oh had this stranger sunk to realms beneath,
To the black realms of darkness and of death,
Ere yet he trod these shores! to strife he draws
Peer against peer; and what the weighty cause?
A vagabond! for him the great destroy,
In vile ignoble jars, the feast of joy.”

To whom the stern Telemachus uprose;
“Gods! what wild folly from the goblet flows!
Whence this unguarded openness of soul,
But from the license of the copious bowl?
Or Heaven delusion sends: but hence away!
Force I forbear, and without force obey.”

Silent, abash’d, they hear the stern rebuke,
Till thus Amphinomus the silence broke:

“True are his words, and he whom truth offends,
Not with Telemachus, but truth contends;
Let not the hand of violence invade
The reverend stranger, or the spotless maid;
Retire we hence, but crown with rosy wine
The flowing goblet to the powers divine!
Guard he his guest beneath whose roof he stands:
This justice, this the social rite demands.”

The peers assent: the goblet Mulius crown’d
With purple juice, and bore in order round:
Each peer successive his libation pours
To the blest gods who fill’d the ethereal bowers:
Then swill’d with wine, with noise the crowds obey,
And rushing forth, tumultuous reel away.






Consulting secret with the blue-eyed maid,
Still in the dome divine Ulysses stay’d:
Revenge mature for act inflamed his breast;
And thus the son the fervent sire address’d:

“Instant convey those steely stores of war
To distant rooms, disposed with secret care:
The cause demanded by the suitor-train,
To soothe their fears, a specious reason feign:
Say, since Ulysses left his natal coast,
Obscene with smoke, their beamy lustre lost,
His arms deform the roof they wont adorn:
From the glad walls inglorious lumber torn.
Suggest, that Jove the peaceful thought inspired,
Lest they, by sight of swords to fury fired,
Dishonest wounds, or violence of soul,
Defame the bridal feast and friendly bowl.”

The prince, obedient to the sage command,
To Euryclea thus: “The female band
In their apartments keep; secure the doors;
These swarthy arms among the covert stores
Are seemlier hid; my thoughtless youth they blame,
Imbrown’d with vapour of the smouldering flame.”

“In happier hour (pleased Euryclea cries),
Tutour’d by early woes, grow early wise;
Inspect with sharpen’d sight, and frugal care,
Your patrimonial wealth, a prudent heir.
But who the lighted taper will provide
(The female train retired) your toils to guide?”

“Without infringing hospitable right,
This guest (he cried) shall bear the guiding light:
I cheer no lazy vagrants with repast;
They share the meal that earn it ere they taste.”

He said: from female ken she straight secures
The purposed deed, and guards the bolted doors:
Auxiliar to his son, Ulysses bears
The plumy-crested helms and pointed spears,
With shields indented deep in glorious wars.
Minerva viewless on her charge attends,
And with her golden lamp his toil befriends.
Not such the sickly beams, which unsincere
Gild the gross vapour of this nether sphere!
A present deity the prince confess’d,
And wrapp’d with ecstasy the sire address’d:

“What miracle thus dazzles with surprise!
Distinct in rows the radiant columns rise;
The walls, where’er my wondering sight I turn,
And roofs, amidst a blaze of glory burn!
Some visitant of pure ethereal race
With his bright presence deigns the dome to grace.”

“Be calm (replies the sire); to none impart,
But oft revolve the vision in thy heart:
Celestials, mantled in excess of light,
Can visit unapproach’d by mortal sight.
Seek thou repose: whilst here I sole remain,
To explore the conduct of the female train:
The pensive queen, perchance, desires to know
The series of my toils, to soothe her woe.”

With tapers flaming day his train attends,
His bright alcove the obsequious youth ascends:
Soft slumberous shades his drooping eyelids close,
Till on her eastern throne Aurora glows.

Whilst, forming plans of death, Ulysses stay’d,
In counsel secret with the martial maid,
Attendant nymphs in beauteous order wait
The queen, descending from her bower of state.
Her cheeks the warmer blush of Venus wear,
Chasten’d with coy Diana’s pensive air.
An ivory seat with silver ringlets graced,
By famed Icmalius wrought, the menials placed:
With ivory silver’d thick the footstool shone,
O’er which the panther’s various hide was thrown.
The sovereign seat with graceful air she press’d;
To different tasks their toil the nymphs address’d:
The golden goblets some, and some restored
From stains of luxury the polish’d board:
These to remove the expiring embers came,
While those with unctuous fir foment the flame.

’Twas then Melantho with imperious mien
Renew’d the attack, incontinent of spleen:
“Avaunt (she cried), offensive to my sight!
Deem not in ambush here to lurk by night,
Into the woman-state asquint to pry;
A day-devourer, and an evening spy!
Vagrant, begone! before this blazing brand
Shall urge”—and waved it hissing in her hand.

The insulted hero rolls his wrathful eyes
And “Why so turbulent of soul? (he cries;)
Can these lean shrivell’d limbs, unnerved with age,
These poor but honest rags, enkindle rage?
In crowds, we wear the badge of hungry fate:
And beg, degraded from superior state!
Constrain’d a rent-charge on the rich I live;
Reduced to crave the good I once could give:
A palace, wealth, and slaves, I late possess’d,
And all that makes the great be call’d the bless’d:
My gate, an emblem of my open soul,
Embraced the poor, and dealt a bounteous dole.
Scorn not the sad reverse, injurious maid!
’Tis Jove’s high will, and be his will obey’d!
Nor think thyself exempt: that rosy prime
Must share the general doom of withering time:
To some new channel soon the changeful tide
Of royal grace the offended queen may guide;
And her loved lord unplume thy towering pride.
Or, were he dead, ’tis wisdom to beware:
Sweet blooms the prince beneath Apollo’s care;
Your deeds with quick impartial eye surveys,
Potent to punish what he cannot praise.”

Her keen reproach had reach’d the sovereign’s ear:
“Loquacious insolent! (she cries,) forbear;
To thee the purpose of my soul I told;
Venial discourse, unblamed, with him to hold;
The storied labours of my wandering lord,
To soothe my grief he haply may record:
Yet him, my guest, thy venom’d rage hath stung;
Thy head shall pay the forfeit of thy tongue!
But thou on whom my palace cares depend,
Eurynome, regard the stranger-friend:
A seat, soft spread with furry spoils, prepare;
Due-distant for us both to speak, and hear.”

The menial fair obeys with duteous haste:
A seat adorn’d with furry spoils she placed:
Due-distant for discourse the hero sate;
When thus the sovereign from her chair of state:

“Reveal, obsequious to my first demand,
Thy name, thy lineage, and thy natal land.”

He thus: “O queen! whose far-resounding fame
Is bounded only by the starry frame,
Consummate pattern of imperial sway,
Whose pious rule a warlike race obey!
In wavy gold thy summer vales are dress’d;
Thy autumns bind with copious fruit oppress’d:
With flocks and herds each grassy plain is stored;
And fish of every fin thy seas afford:
Their affluent joys the grateful realms confess;
And bless the power that still delights to bless,
Gracious permit this prayer, imperial dame!
Forbear to know my lineage, or my name:
Urge not this breast to heave, these eyes to weep;
In sweet oblivion let my sorrows sleep!
My woes awaked, will violate your ear,
And to this gay censorious train appear
A whiny vapour melting in a tear.”

“Their gifts the gods resumed (the queen rejoin’d),
Exterior grace, and energy of mind,
When the dear partner of my nuptial joy,
Auxiliar troops combined, to conquer Troy.
My lord’s protecting hand alone would raise
My drooping verdure, and extend my praise!
Peers from the distant Samian shore resort:
Here with Dulichians join’d, besiege the court:
Zacynthus, green with ever-shady groves,
And Ithaca, presumptuous, boast their loves:
Obtruding on my choice a second lord,
They press the Hymenaean rite abhorr’d.
Misrule thus mingling with domestic cares,
I live regardless of my state affairs;
Receive no stranger-guest, no poor relieve;
But ever for my lord in secret grieve!—
This art, instinct by some celestial power,
I tried, elusive of the bridal hour:

“‘Ye peers, (I cry,) who press to gain a heart,
Where dead Ulysses claims no future part;
Rebate your loves, each rival suit suspend,
Till this funeral web my labours end:
Cease, till to good Laertes I bequeath
A pall of state, the ornament of death.
For when to fate he bows, each Grecian dame
With just reproach were licensed to defame,
Should he, long honour’d in supreme command,
Want the last duties of a daughter’s hand.’
The fiction pleased; their loves I long elude;
The night still ravell’d what the day renew’d:
Three years successful in my heart conceal’d,
My ineffectual fraud the fourth reveal’d:
Befriended by my own domestic spies,
The woof unwrought the suitor-train surprise.
From nuptial rites they now no more recede,
And fear forbids to falsify the brede.
My anxious parents urge a speedy choice,
And to their suffrage gain the filial voice.
For rule mature, Telemachus deplores
His dome dishonour’d, and exhausted stores—
But, stranger! as thy days seem full of fate,
Divide discourse, in turn thy birth relate:
Thy port asserts thee of distinguish’d race;
No poor unfather’d product of disgrace.”

“Princess! (he cries,) renew’d by your command,
The dear remembrance of my native land
Of secret grief unseals the fruitful source;
Fond tears repeat their long-forgotten course!
So pays the wretch whom fate constrains to roam,
The dues of nature to his natal home!—
But inward on my soul let sorrow prey,
Your sovereign will my duty bids obey.

“Crete awes the circling waves, a fruitful soil!
And ninety cities crown the sea-born isle:
Mix’d with her genuine sons, adopted names
In various tongues avow their various claims:
Cydonians, dreadful with the bended yew,
And bold Pelasgi boast a native’s due:
The Dorians, plumed amid the files of war,
Her foodful glebe with fierce Achaians share;
Cnossus, her capital of high command;
Where sceptred Minos with impartial hand
Divided right: each ninth revolving year,
By Jove received in council to confer.
His son Deucalion bore successive sway:
His son, who gave me first to view the day!
The royal bed an elder issue bless’d,
Idomeneus whom Ilion fields attest
Of matchless deeds: untrain’d to martial toil,
I lived inglorious in my native isle,
Studious of peace, and Æthon is my name.
’Twas then to Crete the great Ulysses came.
For elemental war, and wintry Jove,
From Malea’s gusty cape his navy drove
To bright Lucina’s fane; the shelfy coast
Where loud Amnisus in the deep is lost.
His vessels moor’d (an incommodious port!)
The hero speeded to the Cnossian court:
Ardent the partner of his arms to find,
In leagues of long commutual friendship join’d.
Vain hope! ten suns had warm’d the western strand
Since my brave brother, with his Cretan band,
Had sail’d for Troy: but to the genial feast
My honour’d roof received the royal guest:
Beeves for his train the Cnossian peers assign,
A public treat, with jars of generous wine.
Twelve days while Boreas vex’d the aërial space,
My hospitable dome he deign’d to grace:
And when the north had ceased the stormy roar,
He wing’d his voyage to the Phrygian shore.”

Thus the fam’d hero, perfected in wiles,
With fair similitude of truth beguiles
The queen’s attentive ear: dissolved in woe,
From her bright eyes the tears unbounded flow,
As snows collected on the mountain freeze;
When milder regions breathe a vernal breeze,
The fleecy pile obeys the whispering gales,
Ends in a stream, and murmurs through the vales:
So, melting with the pleasing tale he told,
Down her fair cheek the copious torrent roll’d:
She to her present lord laments him lost,
And views that object which she wants the most,
Withering at heart to see the weeping fair,
His eyes look stern, and cast a gloomy stare;
Of horn the stiff relentless balls appear,
Or globes of iron fix’d in either sphere;
Firm wisdom interdicts the softening tear.
A speechless interval of grief ensues,
Till thus the queen the tender theme renews.

“Stranger! that e’er thy hospitable roof
Ulysses graced, confirm by faithful proof;
Delineate to my view my warlike lord,
His form, his habit, and his train record.”

“‘Tis hard (he cries,) to bring to sudden sight
Ideas that have wing’d their distant flight;
Rare on the mind those images are traced,
Whose footsteps twenty winters have defaced:
But what I can, receive.—In ample mode,
A robe of military purple flow’d
O’er all his frame: illustrious on his breast,
The double-clasping gold the king confess’d.
In the rich woof a hound, mosaic drawn,
Bore on full stretch, and seized a dappled fawn;
Deep in the neck his fangs indent their hold;
They pant and struggle in the moving gold.
Fine as a filmy web beneath it shone
A vest, that dazzled like a cloudless sun:
The female train who round him throng’d to gaze,
In silent wonder sigh’d unwilling praise.
A sabre, when the warrior press’d to part,
I gave, enamell’d with Vulcanian art:
A mantle purple-tinged, and radiant vest,
Dimension’d equal to his size, express’d
Affection grateful to my honour’d guest.
A favourite herald in his train I knew,
His visage solemn, sad of sable hue:
Short woolly curls o’erfleeced his bending head,
O’er which a promontory shoulder spread;
Eurybates; in whose large soul alone
Ulysses view’d an image of his own.”

His speech the tempest of her grief restored;
In all he told she recognized her lord:
But when the storm was spent in plenteous showers,
A pause inspiriting her languish’d powers,
“O thou, (she cried,) whom first inclement Fate
Made welcome to my hospitable gate;
With all thy wants the name of poor shall end:
Henceforth live honour’d, my domestic friend!
The vest much envied on your native coast,
And regal robe with figured gold emboss’d,
In happier hours my artful hand employ’d,
When my loved lord this blissful bower enjoy’d:
The fall of Troy erroneous and forlorn
Doom’d to survive, and never to return!”

Then he, with pity touch’d: “O royal dame!
Your ever-anxious mind, and beauteous frame,
From the devouring rage of grief reclaim.
I not the fondness of your soul reprove
For such a lord! who crown’d your virgin love
With the dear blessing of a fair increase;
Himself adorn’d with more than mortal grace:
Yet while I speak the mighty woe suspend;
Truth forms my tale; to pleasing truth attend.
The royal object of your dearest care
Breathes in no distant clime the vital air:
In rich Thesprotia, and the nearer bound
Of Thessaly, his name I heard renown’d:
Without retinue, to that friendly shore
Welcomed with gifts of price, a sumless store!
His sacrilegious train, who dared to prey
On herds devoted to the god of day,
Were doom’d by Jove, and Phœbus’ just decree,
To perish in the rough Trinacrian sea.
To better fate the blameless chief ordain’d,
A floating fragment of the wreck regain’d,
And rode the storm; till, by the billows toss’d,
He landed on the fair Phæacian coast.
That race who emulate the life of gods,
Receive him joyous to their bless’d abodes;
Large gifts confer, a ready sail command,
To speed his voyage to the Grecian strand.
But your wise lord (in whose capacious soul
High schemes of power in just succession roll)
His Ithaca refused from favouring Fate,
Till copious wealth might guard his regal state.
Phedon the fact affirm’d, whose sovereign sway
Thesprotian tribes, a duteous race, obey;
And bade the gods this added truth attest
(While pure libations crown’d the genial feast),
That anchor’d in his port the vessels stand,
To waft the hero to his natal land.
I for Dulichium urge the watery way,
But first the Ulyssean wealth survey:
So rich the value of a store so vast
Demands the pomp of centuries to waste!
The darling object of your royal love
Was journey’d thence to Dodonean Jove;
By the sure precept of the sylvan shrine,
To form the conduct of his great design;
Irresolute of soul, his state to shroud
In dark disguise, or come, a king avow’d!
Thus lives your lord; nor longer doom’d to roam;
Soon will he grace this dear paternal dome.
By Jove, the source of good, supreme in power!
By the bless’d genius of this friendly bower!
I ratify my speech, before the sun
His annual longitude of heaven shall run;
When the pale empress of yon starry train
In the next month renews her faded wane,
Ulysses will assert his rightful reign.”

“What thanks! what boon! (replied the queen), are due,
When time shall prove the storied blessing true!
My lord’s return should fate no more retard,
Envy shall sicken at thy vast reward.
But my prophetic fears, alas! presage
The wounds of Destiny’s relentless rage.
I long must weep, nor will Ulysses come,
With royal gifts to send you honour’d home!—
Your other task, ye menial train forbear:
Now wash the stranger, and the bed prepare:
With splendid palls the downy fleece adorn:
Uprising early with the purple morn.
His sinews, shrunk with age, and stiff with toil,
In the warm bath foment with fragrant oil.
Then with Telemachus the social feast
Partaking free, my soul invited guest;
Whoe’er neglects to pay distinction due,
The breach of hospitable right may rue.
The vulgar of my sex I most exceed
In real fame, when most humane my deed;
And vainly to the praise of queen aspire,
If, stranger! I permit that mean attire
Beneath the feastful bower. A narrow space
Confines the circle of our destin’d race;
’Tis ours with good the scanty round to grace.
Those who to cruel wrong their state abuse,
Dreaded in life the mutter’d curse pursues;
By death disrobed of all their savage powers,
Then, licensed rage her hateful prey devours.
But he whose inborn worth his acts commend,
Of gentle soul, to human race a friend;
The wretched he relieves diffuse his fame,
And distant tongues extol the patron-name.”

“Princess? (he cried) in vain your bounties flow
On me, confirm’d and obstinate in woe.
When my loved Crete received my final view,
And from my weeping eyes her cliffs withdrew;
These tatter’d weeds (my decent robes resign’d)
I chose, the livery of a woful mind!
Nor will my heart-corroding care abate
With splendid palls, and canopies of state:
Low-couch’d on earth, the gift of sleep I scorn,
And catch the glances of the waking morn.
The delicacy of your courtly train
To wash a wretched wanderer would disdain;
But if, in tract of long experience tried,
And sad similitude of woes allied,
Some wretch reluctant views aërial light,
To her mean hand assign the friendly rite.”

Pleased with his wise reply, the queen rejoin’d:
“Such gentle manners, and so sage a mind,
In all who graced this hospitable bower
I ne’er discerned, before this social hour.
Such servant as your humble choice requires,
To light received the lord of my desires,
New from the birth; and with a mother’s hand
His tender bloom to manly growth sustain’d:
Of matchless prudence, and a duteous mind;
Though now to life’s extremest verge declined,
Of strength superior to the toil design’d—
Rise, Euryclea! with officious care
For the poor friend the cleansing bath prepare:
This debt his correspondent fortunes claim,
Too like Ulysses, and perhaps the same!
Thus old with woes my fancy paints him now!
For age untimely marks the careful brow.”

Instant, obsequious to the mild command,
Sad Euryclea rose: with trembling hand
She veils the torrent of her tearful eyes;
And thus impassion’d to herself replies:

“Son of my love, and monarch of my cares,
What pangs for thee this wretched bosom bears!
Are thus by Jove who constant beg his aid
With pious deed, and pure devotion, paid?
He never dared defraud the sacred fane
Of perfect hecatombs in order slain:
There oft implored his tutelary power,
Long to protract the sad sepulchral hour;
That, form’d for empire with paternal care,
His realm might recognize an equal heir.
O destined head! The pious vows are lost;
His God forgets him on a foreign coast!—
Perhaps, like thee, poor guest! in wanton pride
The rich insult him, and the young deride!
Conscious of worth reviled, thy generous mind
The friendly rite of purity declined;
My will concurring with my queen’s command,
Accept the bath from this obsequious hand.
A strong emotion shakes my anguish’d breast:
In thy whole form Ulysses seems express’d;
Of all the wretched harboured on our coast,
None imaged e’er like thee my master lost.”

Thus half-discover’d through the dark disguise,
With cool composure feign’d, the chief replies:
“You join your suffrage to the public vote;
The same you think have all beholders thought.”

He said: replenish’d from the purest springs,
The laver straight with busy care she brings:
In the deep vase, that shone like burnish’d gold,
The boiling fluid temperates the cold.
Meantime revolving in his thoughtful mind
The scar, with which his manly knee was sign’d;
His face averting from the crackling blaze,
His shoulders intercept the unfriendly rays:
Thus cautious in the obscure he hoped to fly
The curious search of Euryclea’s eye.
Cautious in vain! nor ceased the dame to find
This scar with which his manly knee was sign’d.

This on Parnassus (combating the boar)
With glancing rage the tusky savage tore.
Attended by his brave maternal race,
His grandsire sent him to the sylvan chase,
Autolycus the bold (a mighty name
For spotless faith and deeds of martial fame:
Hermes, his patron god, those gifts bestow’d,
Whose shrine with weanling lambs he wont to load).
His course to Ithaca this hero sped,
When the first product of Laertes’ bed
Was now disclosed to birth: the banquet ends,
When Euryclea from the queen descends,
And to his fond embrace the babe commends:
“Receive (she cries) your royal daughter’s son;
And name the blessing that your prayers have won.”
Then thus the hoary chief: “My victor arms
Have awed the realms around with dire alarms:
A sure memorial of my dreaded fame
The boy shall bear; Ulysses be his name!
And when with filial love the youth shall come
To view his mother’s soil, my Delphic dome
With gifts of price shall send him joyous home.”
Lured with the promised boon, when youthful prime
Ended in man, his mother’s natal clime
Ulysses sought; with fond affection dear
Amphitea’s arms received the royal heir:
Her ancient lord an equal joy possess’d;
Instant he bade prepare the genial feast:
A steer to form the sumptuous banquet bled,
Whose stately growth five flowery summers fed:
His sons divide, and roast with artful care
The limbs; then all the tasteful viands share.
Nor ceased discourse (the banquet of the soul),
Till Phœbus wheeling to the western goal
Resign’d the skies, and night involved the pole.
Their drooping eyes the slumberous shade oppress’d,
Sated they rose, and all retired to rest.

Soon as the morn, new-robed in purple light,
Pierced with her golden shafts the rear of night,
Ulysses, and his brave maternal race,
The young Autolyci, essay the chase.
Parnassus, thick perplex’d with horrid shades,
With deep-mouth’d hounds the hunter-troop invades;
What time the sun, from ocean’s peaceful stream,
Darts o’er the lawn his horizontal beam.
The pack impatient snuff the tainted gale;
The thorny wilds the woodmen fierce assail:
And, foremost of the train, his cornel spear
Ulysses waved, to rouse the savage war.
Deep in the rough recesses of the wood,
A lofty copse, the growth of ages, stood;
Nor winter’s boreal blast, nor thunderous shower,
Nor solar ray, could pierce the shady bower.
With wither’d foliage strew’d, a heapy store!
The warm pavilion of a dreadful boar.
Roused by the hounds’ and hunters’ mingling cries,
The savage from his leafy shelter flies;
With fiery glare his sanguine eye-balls shine,
And bristles high impale his horrid chine.
Young Ithacus advanced, defies the foe,
Poising his lifted lance in act to throw;
The savage renders vain the wound decreed,
And springs impetuous with opponent speed!
His tusks oblique he aim’d, the knee to gore;
Aslope they glanced, the sinewy fibres tore,
And bared the bone; Ulysses undismay’d,
Soon with redoubled force the wound repaid;
To the right shoulder-joint the spear applied,
His further flank with streaming purple dyed:
On earth he rushed with agonizing pain;
With joy and vast surprise, the applauding train
View’d his enormous bulk extended on the plain.
With bandage firm Ulysses’ knee they bound;
Then, chanting mystic lays, the closing wound
Of sacred melody confess’d the force;
The tides of life regain’d their azure course.
Then back they led the youth with loud acclaim;
Autolycus, enamoured with his fame,
Confirm’d the cure; and from the Delphic dome
With added gifts return’d him glorious home.
He safe at Ithaca with joy received,
Relates the chase, and early praise achieved.

Deep o’er his knee inseam’d remain’d the scar;
Which noted token of the woodland war
When Euryclea found, the ablution ceased:
Down dropp’d the leg, from her slack hand released;
The mingled fluids from the base redound;
The vase reclining floats the floor around!
Smiles dew’d with tears the pleasing strife express’d
Of grief and joy, alternate in her breast.
Her fluttering words in melting murmurs died;
At length abrupt—“My son!—my king!”—she cried.
His neck with fond embrace infolding fast,
Full on the queen her raptured eye she cast
Ardent to speak the monarch safe restored:
But, studious to conceal her royal lord,
Minerva fix’d her mind on views remote,
And from the present bliss abstracts her thought.
His hand to Euryclea’s mouth applied,
“Art thou foredoom’d my pest? (the hero cried:)
Thy milky founts my infant lips have drain’d;
And have the Fates thy babbling age ordain’d
To violate the life thy youth sustain’d?
An exile have I told, with weeping eyes,
Full twenty annual suns in distant skies;
At length return’d, some god inspires thy breast
To know thy king, and here I stand confess’d.
This heaven-discover’d truth to thee consign’d,
Reserve the treasure of thy inmost mind:
Else, if the gods my vengeful arm sustain,
And prostrate to my sword the suitor-train;
With their lewd mates, thy undistinguish’d age
Shall bleed a victim to vindictive rage.”

Then thus rejoin’d the dame, devoid of fear:
“What words, my son, have passed thy lips severe?
Deep in my soul the trust shall lodge secured;
With ribs of steel, and marble heart, immured.
When Heaven, auspicious to thy right avow’d,
Shall prostrate to thy sword the suitor-crowd,
The deeds I’ll blazon of the menial fair;
The lewd to death devote, the virtuous spare.”

“Thy aid avails me not (the chief replied);
My own experience shall their doom decide:
A witness-judge precludes a long appeal:
Suffice it then thy monarch to conceal.”

He said: obsequious, with redoubled pace,
She to the fount conveys the exhausted vase:
The bath renew’d, she ends the pleasing toil
With plenteous unction of ambrosial oil.
Adjusting to his limbs the tatter’d vest,
His former seat received the stranger guest;
Whom thus with pensive air the queen addressed:

“Though night, dissolving grief in grateful ease,
Your drooping eyes with soft impression seize;
Awhile, reluctant to her pleasing force,
Suspend the restful hour with sweet discourse.
The day (ne’er brighten’d with a beam of joy!)
My menials, and domestic cares employ;
And, unattended by sincere repose,
The night assists my ever-wakeful woes;
When nature’s hush’d beneath her brooding shade,
My echoing griefs the starry vault invade.
As when the months are clad in flowery green,
Sad Philomel, in bowery shades unseen,
To vernal airs attunes her varied strains;
And Itylus sounds warbling o’er the plains;
Young Itylus, his parents’ darling joy!
Whom chance misled the mother to destroy;
Now doom’d a wakeful bird to wail the beauteous boy.
So in nocturnal solitude forlorn,
A sad variety of woes I mourn!
My mind, reflective, in a thorny maze
Devious from care to care incessant strays.
Now, wavering doubt succeeds to long despair;
Shall I my virgin nuptial vow revere;
And, joining to my son’s my menial train,
Partake his counsels, and assist his reign?
Or, since, mature in manhood, he deplores
His dome dishonour’d, and exhausted stores;
Shall I, reluctant! to his will accord;
And from the peers select the noblest lord;
So by my choice avow’d, at length decide
These wasteful love-debates, a mourning bride!
A visionary thought I’ll now relate;
Illustrate, if you know, the shadow’d fate:

“A team of twenty geese (a snow-white train!)
Fed near the limpid lake with golden grain,
Amuse my pensive hours. The bird of Jove
Fierce from his mountain-eyrie downward drove;
Each favourite fowl he pounced with deathful sway,
And back triumphant wing’d his airy way.
My pitying eyes effused a plenteous stream,
To view their death thus imaged in a dream;
With tender sympathy to soothe my soul,
A troop of matrons, fancy-form’d, condole.
But whilst with grief and rage my bosom burn’d,
Sudden the tyrant of the skies returned;
Perch’d on the battlements he thus began
(In form an eagle, but in voice a man):
`O queen! no vulgar vision of the sky
I come, prophetic of approaching joy;
View in this plumy form thy victor-lord;
The geese (a glutton race) by thee deplored,
Portend the suitors fated to my sword.’
This said, the pleasing feather’d omen ceased.
When from the downy bands of sleep released,
Fast by the limpid lake my swan-like train
I found, insatiate of the golden grain.”

“The vision self-explain’d (the chief replies)
Sincere reveals the sanction of the skies;
Ulysses speaks his own return decreed;
And by his sword the suitors sure to bleed.”

“Hard is the task, and rare,” (the queen rejoin’d,)
Impending destinies in dreams to find;
Immured within the silent bower of sleep,
Two portals firm the various phantoms keep;
Of ivory one; whence flit, to mock the brain,
Of winged lies a light fantastic train;
The gate opposed pellucid valves adorn,
And columns fair incased with polish’d horn;
Where images of truth for passage wait,
With visions manifest of future fate.
Not to this troop, I fear, that phantom soar’d,
Which spoke Ulysses to this realm restored;
Delusive semblance!-but my remnant life
Heaven shall determine in a gameful strife;
With that famed bow Ulysses taught to bend,
For me the rival archers shall contend.
As on the listed field he used to place
Six beams, opposed to six in equal space;
Elanced afar by his unerring art,
Sure through six circlets flew the whizzing dart.
So, when the sun restores the purple day,
Their strength and skill the suitors shall assay;
To him the spousal honour is decreed,
Who through the rings directs the feather’d reed.
Torn from these walls (where long the kinder powers
With joy and pomp have wing’d my youthful hours!)
On this poor breast no dawn of bliss shall beam;
The pleasure past supplies a copious theme
For many a dreary thought, and many a doleful dream!”

“Propose the sportive lot (the chief replies),
Nor dread to name yourself the bowyer’s prize;
Ulysses will surprise the unfinish’d game,
Avow’d, and falsify the suitors’ claim.”

To whom with grace serene the queen rejoin’d:
“In all thy speech what pleasing force I find!
O’er my suspended woe thy words prevail;
I part reluctant from the pleasing tale,
But Heaven, that knows what all terrestrials need,
Repose to night, and toil to day decreed;
Grateful vicissitudes! yet me withdrawn,
Wakeful to weep and watch the tardy dawn
Establish’d use enjoins; to rest and joy
Estranged, since dear Ulysses sail’d to Troy!
Meantime instructed is the menial tribe
Your couch to fashion as yourself prescribe.”

Thus affable, her bower the queen ascends;
The sovereign step a beauteous train attends;
There imaged to her soul Ulysses rose;
Down her pale cheek new-streaming sorrow flows;
Till soft oblivious shade Minerva spread,
And o’er her eyes ambrosial slumber shed.







An ample hide devine Ulysses spread.
And form’d of fleecy skins his humble bed
(The remnants of the spoil the suitor-crowd
In festival devour’d, and victims vow’d).
Then o’er the chief, Eurynome the chaste
With duteous care a downy carpet cast:
With dire revenge his thoughtful bosom glows,
And, ruminating wrath, he scorns repose.

As thus pavilion’d in the porch he lay,
Scenes of lewd loves his wakeful eyes survey,
Whilst to nocturnal joys impure repair,
With wanton glee, the prostituted fair.
His heart with rage this new dishonour stung,
Wavering his thoughts in dubious balance hung:
Or instant should he quench the guilty flame
With their own blood, and intercept the shame:
Or to their lust indulge a last embrace,
And let the peers consummate the disgrace
Round his swoln heart the murmurous fury rolls,
As o’er her young the mother-mastiff growls,
And bays the stranger groom: so wrath compress’d,
Recoiling, mutter’d thunder in his breast.
“Poor suffering heart! (he cried,) support the pain
Of wounded honour, and thy rage restrain.
Not fiercer woes thy fortitude could foil,
When the brave partners of thy ten years’ toil
Dire Polypheme devour’d; I then was freed
By patient prudence from the death decreed.”

Thus anchor’d safe on reason’s peaceful coast,
Tempests of wrath his soul no longer toss’d;
Restless his body rolls, to rage resign’d
As one who long with pale-eyed famine pined,
The savoury cates on glowing embers cast
Incessant turns, impatient for repast
Ulysses so, from side to side-devolved,
In self-debate the suitor’s doom resolved
When in the form of mortal nymph array’d,
From heaven descends the Jove-born martial maid;
And hovering o’er his head in view confess’d,
The goddess thus her favourite care address’d:

“O thou, of mortals most inured to woes!
Why roll those eyes unfriended of repose?
Beneath thy palace-roof forget thy care;
Bless’d in thy queen! bless’d in thy blooming heir!
Whom, to the gods when suppliant fathers bow
They name the standard of their dearest vow.”

“Just is thy kind reproach (the chief rejoin’d),
Deeds full of fate distract my various mind,
In contemplation wrapp’d. This hostile crew
What single arm hath prowess to subdue?
Or if, by Jove’s and thy auxiliar aid,
They’re doom’d to bleed; O say, celestial maid!
Where shall Ulysses shun, or how sustain
Nations embattled to revenge the slain?”

“Oh impotence of faith! (Minerva cries,)
If man on frail unknowing man relies,
Doubt you the gods? Lo, Pallas self descends,
Inspires thy counsels, and thy toils attends.
In me affianced, fortify thy breast,
Though myriads leagued thy rightful claim contest
My sure divinity shall bear the shield,
And edge thy sword to reap the glorious field.
Now, pay the debt to craving nature due,
Her faded powers with balmy rest renew.”
She ceased, ambrosial slumbers seal his eyes;
Her care dissolves in visionary joys
The goddess, pleased, regains her natal skies.

Not so the queen; the downy bands of sleep
By grief relax’d she waked again to weep:
A gloomy pause ensued of dumb despair;
Then thus her fate invoked, with fervent prayer

“Diana! speed thy deathful ebon dart,
And cure the pangs of this convulsive heart.
Snatch me, ye whirlwinds! far from human race,
Toss’d through the void illimitable space
Or if dismounted from the rapid cloud,
Me with his whelming wave let Ocean shroud!
So, Pandarus, thy hopes, three orphan fair,
Were doom’d to wander through the devious air;
Thyself untimely, and thy consort died,
But four celestials both your cares supplied.
Venus in tender delicacy rears
With honey, milk, and wine their infant years;
Imperial Juno to their youth assigned
A form majestic, and sagacious mind;
With shapely growth Diana graced their bloom;
And Pallas taught the texture of the loom.
But whilst, to learn their lots in nuptial love,
Bright Cytherea sought the bower of Jove
(The God supreme, to whose eternal eye
The registers of fate expanded lie);
Wing’d Harpies snatch the unguarded charge away,
And to the Furies bore a grateful prey.
Be such my lot! Or thou, Diana, speed
Thy shaft, and send me joyful to the dead;
To seek my lord among the warrior train,
Ere second vows my bridal faith profane.
When woes the waking sense alone assail,
Whilst Night extends her soft oblivious veil,
Of other wretches’ care the torture ends;
No truce the warfare of my heart suspends!
The night renews the day distracting theme,
And airy terrors sable every dream.
The last alone a kind illusion wrought,
And to my bed my loved Ulysses brought,
In manly bloom, and each majestic grace,
As when for Troy he left my fond embrace;
Such raptures in my beating bosom rise,
I deem it sure a vision of the skies.”

Thus, whilst Aurora mounts her purple throne,
In audible laments she breathes her moan;
The sounds assault Ulysses’ wakeful ear;
Misjudging of the cause, a sudden fear
Of his arrival known, the chief alarms;
He thinks the queen is rushing to his arms.
Upspringing from his couch, with active haste
The fleece and carpet in the dome he placed
(The hide, without, imbibed the morning air);
And thus the gods invoked with ardent prayer:

“Jove, and eternal thrones! with heaven to friend,
If the long series of my woes shall end;
Of human race now rising from repose,
Let one a blissful omen here disclose;
And, to confirm my faith, propitious Jove!
Vouchsafe the sanction of a sign above.”

Whilst lowly thus the chief adoring bows,
The pitying god his guardian aid avows.
Loud from a sapphire sky his thunder sounds;
With springing hope the hero’s heart rebounds.
Soon, with consummate joy to crown his prayer,
An omen’d voice invades his ravish’d ear.
Beneath a pile that close the dome adjoin’d,
Twelve female slaves the gift of Ceres grind;
Task’d for the royal board to bolt the bran
From the pure flour (the growth and strength of man)
Discharging to the day the labour due,
Now early to repose the rest withdrew;
One maid unequal to the task assign’d,
Still turn’d the toilsome mill with anxious mind;
And thus in bitterness of soul divined:

“Father of gods and men, whose thunders roll
O’er the cerulean vault, and shake the pole:
Whoe’er from Heaven has gain’d this rare ostent
(Of granted vows a certain signal sent),
In this blest moment of accepted prayer,
Piteous, regard a wretch consumed with care!
Instant, O Jove! confound the suitor-train,
For whom o’ertoil’d I grind the golden grain:
Far from this dome the lewd devourers cast,
And be this festival decreed their last!”

Big with their doom denounced in earth and sky,
Ulysses’ heart dilates with secret joy.
Meantime the menial train with unctious wood
Heap’d high the genial hearth, Vulcanian food:
When, early dress’d, advanced the royal heir;
With manly grasp he waved a martial spear;
A radiant sabre graced his purple zone,
And on his foot the golden sandal shone.
His steps impetuous to the portal press’d;
And Euryclea thus he there address’d:

“Say thou to whom my youth its nurture owes,
Was care for due refection and repose
Bestow’d the stranger-guest? Or waits he grieved,
His age not honour’d, nor his wants relieved?
Promiscuous grace on all the queen confers
(In woes bewilder’d, oft the wisest errs).
The wordy vagrant to the dole aspires,
And modest worth with noble scorn retires.”

She thus: “O cease that ever-honour’d name
To blemish now: it ill deserves your blame,
A bowl of generous wine sufficed the guest;
In vain the queen the night refection press’d;
Nor would he court repose in downy state,
Unbless’d, abandon’d to the rage of Fate!
A hide beneath the portico was spread,
And fleecy skins composed an humble bed;
A downy carpet cast with duteous care,
Secured him from the keen nocturnal air.”

His cornel javelin poised with regal port,
To the sage Greeks convened in Themis’ court,
Forth-issuing from the dome the prince repair’d;
Two dogs of chase, a lion-hearted guard,
Behind him sourly stalked. Without delay
The dame divides the labour of the day;
Thus urging to the toil the menial train;

“What marks of luxury the marble stain
Its wonted lustre let the floor regain;
The seats with purple clothe in order due;
And let the abstersive sponge the board renew;
Let some refresh the vase’s sullied mould;
Some bid the goblets boast their native gold;
Some to the spring, with each a jar, repair,
And copious waters pure for bathing bear;
Dispatch! for soon the suitors will essay
The lunar feast-rites to the god of day.”

She said: with duteous haste a bevy fair
Of twenty virgins to the spring repair;
With varied toils the rest adorn the dome.
Magnificent, and blithe, the suitors come.
Some wield the sounding axe; the dodder’d oaks
Divide, obedient to the forceful strokes.
Soon from the fount, with each a brimming urn
(Eumaeus in their train), the maids return.
Three porkers for the feast, all brawny-chined,
He brought; the choicest of the tusky-kind;
In lodgments first secure his care he viewed,
Then to the king this friendly speech renew’d:
“Now say sincere, my guest! the suitor-train
Still treat thy worth with lordly dull disdain;
Or speaks their deed a bounteous mind humane?”

“Some pitying god (Ulysses sad replied)
With vollied vengeance blast their towering pride!
No conscious blush, no sense of right, restrains
The tides of lust that swell the boiling veins;
From vice to vice their appetites are toss’d,
All cheaply sated at another’s cost!”

While thus the chief his woes indignant told,
Melanthius, master of the bearded fold,
The goodliest goats of all the royal herd
Spontaneous to the suitors’ feast preferr’d;
Two grooms assistant bore the victims bound;
With quavering cries the vaulted roofs resound;
And to the chief austere aloud began
The wretch unfriendly to the race of man:

“Here vagrant, still? offensive to my lords!
Blows have more energy than airy words;
These arguments I’ll use: nor conscious shame,
Nor threats, thy bold intrusion will reclaim.
On this high feast the meanest vulgar boast
A plenteous board! Hence! seek another host!”

Rejoinder to the churl the king disdain’d,
But shook his head, and rising wrath restrain’d.

From Cephalenia ’cross the surgy main
Philaetius late arrived, a faithful swain.
A steer ungrateful to the bull’s embrace.
And goats he brought, the pride of all their race;
Imported in a shallop not his own;
The dome re-echoed to the mingl’d moan.
Straight to the guardian of the bristly kind
He thus began, benevolent of mind:

“What guest is he, of such majestic air?
His lineage and paternal clime declare:
Dim through the eclipse of fate, the rays divine
Of sovereign state with faded splendour shine.
If monarchs by the gods are plunged in woe,
To what abyss are we foredoom’d to go!”
Then affable he thus the chief address’d,
Whilst with pathetic warmth his hand he press’d:

“Stranger, may fate a milder aspect show,
And spin thy future with a whiter clue!
O Jove! for ever deaf to human cries;
The tyrant, not the father of the skies!
Unpiteous of the race thy will began!
The fool of fate, thy manufacture, man,
With penury, contempt, repulse, and care,
The galling load of life is doom’d to bear.
Ulysses from his state a wanderer still,
Upbraids thy power, thy wisdom, or thy will!
O monarch ever dear!-O man of woe!
Fresh flow my tears, and shall for ever flow!
Like thee, poor stranger guest, denied his home,
Like thee: in rags obscene decreed to roam!
Or, haply perish’d on some distant coast,
In stygian gloom he glides, a pensive ghost!
Oh, grateful for the good his bounty gave,
I’ll grieve, till sorrow sink me to the grave!
His kind protecting hand my youth preferr’d,
The regent of his Cephalenian herd;
With vast increase beneath my care it spreads:
A stately breed! and blackens far the meads.
Constrain’d, the choicest beeves I thence import,
To cram these cormorants that crowd his court:
Who in partition seek his realm to share;
Nor human right nor wrath divine revere,
Since here resolved oppressive these reside,
Contending doubts my anxious heart divide:
Now to some foreign clime inclined to fly,
And with the royal herd protection buy;
Then, happier thoughts return the nodding scale,
Light mounts despair, alternate hopes prevail:
In opening prospects of ideal joy,
My king returns; the proud usurpers die.”

To whom the chief: “In thy capacious mind
Since daring zeal with cool debate is join’d,
Attend a deed already ripe in fate:
Attest, O Jove! the truth I now relate!
This sacred truth attest, each genial power,
Who bless the board, and guard this friendly bower!
Before thou quit the dome (nor long delay)
Thy wish produced in act, with pleased survey,
Thy wondering eyes shall view: his rightful reign
By arms avow’d Ulysses shall regain,
And to the shades devote the suitor-train.”

“O Jove supreme! (the raptured swain replies,)
With deeds consummate soon the promised joys!
These aged nerves, with new-born vigour strung,
In that blest cause should emulate the young.”
Assents Eumaeus to the prayer address’d;
And equal ardours fire his loyal breast.

Meantime the suitors urge the prince’s fate,
And deathful arts employ the dire debate:
When in his airy tour, the bird of Jove
Truss’d with his sinewy pounce a trembling dove;
Sinister to their hope! This omen eyed
Amphinomus, who thus presaging cried:

“The gods from force and fraud the prince defend;
O peers! the sanguinary scheme suspend:
Your future thought let sable fate employ;
And give the present hour to genial joy.”

From council straight the assenting peerage ceased,
And in the dome prepared the genial feast.
Disrobed, their vests apart in order lay,
Then all with speed succinct the victims slay:
With sheep and shaggy goats the porkers bled,
And the proud steer was on the marble spread.
With fire prepared, they deal the morsels round,
Wine, rosy-bright, the brimming goblets crown’d,
By sage Eumaeus borne; the purple tide
Melanthius from an ample jar supplied:
High canisters of bread Philaetius placed;
And eager all devour the rich repast.
Disposed apart, Ulysses shares the treat;
A trivet table, and ignobler seat,
The prince appoints; but to his sire assigns
The tasteful inwards, and nectareous wines.
“Partake, my guest (he cried), without control
The social feast, and drain the cheering bowl:
Dread not the railer’s laugh, nor ruffian’s rage;
No vulgar roof protects thy honour’d age;
This dome a refuge to thy wrongs shall be,
From my great sire too soon devolved to me!
Your violence and scorn, ye suitors, cease,
Lest arms avenge the violated peace.”

Awed by the prince, so haughty, brave, and young,
Rage gnaw’d the lip, amazement chain’d the tongue.
“Be patient, peers! (at length Antinous cries,)
The threats of vain imperious youth despise:
Would Jove permit the meditated blow,
That stream of eloquence should cease to flow.”

Without reply vouchsafed, Antinous ceased:
Meanwhile the pomp of festival increased:
By heralds rank’d; in marshall’d order move
The city tribes, to pleased Apollo’s grove:
Beneath the verdure of which awful shade,
The lunar hecatomb they grateful laid;
Partook the sacred feast, and ritual honours paid.
But the rich banquet, in the dome prepared
(An humble sideboard set) Ulysses shared.
Observant of the prince’s high behest,
His menial train attend the stranger-guest;
Whom Pallas with unpardoning fury fired,
By lordly pride and keen reproach inspired.
A Samian peer, more studious than the rest
Of vice, who teem’d with many a dead-born jest;
And urged, for title to a consort queen,
Unnumber’d acres arable and green
(Ctesippus named); this lord Ulysses eyed,
And thus burst out the imposthumate with pride:

“The sentence I propose, ye peers, attend:
Since due regard must wait the prince’s friend,
Let each a token of esteem bestow:
This gift acquits the dear respect I owe;
With which he nobly may discharge his seat,
And pay the menials for a master’s treat.”

He said: and of the steer before him placed,
That sinewy fragment at Ulysses cast,
Where to the pastern-bone, by nerves combined,
The well-horn’d foot indissolubly join’d;
Which whizzing high, the wall unseemly sign’d.
The chief indignant grins a ghastly smile;
Revenge and scorn within his bosom boil:
When thus the prince with pious rage inflamed:
“Had not the inglorious wound thy malice aim’d
Fall’n guiltless of the mark, my certain spear
Had made thee buy the brutal triumph dear:
Nor should thy sire a queen his daughter boast;
The suitor, now, had vanish’d in a ghost:
No more, ye lewd compeers, with lawless power
Invade my dome, my herds and flocks devour:
For genuine worth, of age mature to know,
My grape shall redden, and my harvest grow
Or, if each other’s wrongs ye still support,
With rapes and riot to profane my court;
What single arm with numbers can contend?
On me let all your lifted swords descend,
And with my life such vile dishonours end.”

A long cessation of discourse ensued,
By gentler Agelaus thus renew’d:

“A just reproof, ye peers! your rage restrain
From the protected guest, and menial train:
And, prince! to stop the source of future ill,
Assent yourself, and gain the royal will.
Whilst hope prevail’d to see your sire restored,
Of right the queen refused a second lord:
But who so vain of faith, so blind to fate,
To think he still survives to claim the state?
Now press the sovereign dame with warm desire
To wed, as wealth or worth her choice inspire:
The lord selected to the nuptial joys
Far hence will lead the long-contested prize:
Whilst in paternal pomp with plenty bless’d,
You reign, of this imperial dome possess’d.”

Sage and serene Telemachus replies:
“By him at whose behest the thunder flies,
And by the name on earth I most revere,
By great Ulysses and his woes I swear!
(Who never must review his dear domain;
Enroll’d, perhaps, in Pluto’s dreary train),
Whene’er her choice the royal dame avows,
My bridal gifts shall load the future spouse:
But from this dome my parent queen to chase!
From me, ye gods! avert such dire disgrace.”

But Pallas clouds with intellectual gloom
The suitors’ souls, insensate of their doom!
A mirthful frenzy seized the fated crowd;
The roofs resound with causeless laughter loud;
Floating in gore, portentous to survey!
In each discolour’d vase the viands lay;
Then down each cheek the tears spontaneous flow
And sudden sighs precede approaching woe.
In vision wrapp’d, the Hyperesian seer
Uprose, and thus divined the vengeance near:

“O race to death devote! with Stygian shade
Each destin’d peer impending fates invade;
With tears your wan distorted cheeks are drown’d;
With sanguine drops the walls are rubied round:
Thick swarms the spacious hall with howling ghosts,
To people Orcus, and the burning coasts!
Nor gives the sun his golden orb to roll,
But universal night usurps the pole!”

Yet warn’d in vain, with laughter loud elate
The peers reproach the sure divine of Fate;
And thus Eurymachus: “The dotard’s mind
To every sense is lost, to reason blind;
Swift from the dome conduct the slave away;
Let him in open air behold the day.”

“Tax not (the heaven-illumined seer rejoin’d)
Of rage, or folly, my prophetic mind,
No clouds of error dim the ethereal rays,
Her equal power each faithful sense obeys.
Unguided hence my trembling steps I bend,
Far hence, before yon hovering deaths descend;
Lest the ripe harvest of revenge begun,
I share the doom ye suitors cannot shun.”

This said, to sage Piraeus sped the seer,
His honour’d host, a welcome inmate there.
O’er the protracted feast the suitors sit,
And aim to wound the prince with pointless wit:
Cries one, with scornful leer and mimic voice,
“Thy charity we praise, but not thy choice;
Why such profusion of indulgence shown
To this poor, timorous, toil-detesting drone?
That others feeds on planetary schemes,
And pays his host with hideous noon-day dreams.
But, prince! for once at least believe a friend;
To some Sicilian mart these courtiers send,
Where, if they yield their freight across the main,
Dear sell the slaves! demand no greater gain.”

Thus jovial they; but nought the prince replies;
Full on his sire he roll’d his ardent eyes:
Impatient straight to flesh his virgin-sword;
From the wise chief he waits the deathful word.
Nigh in her bright alcove, the pensive queen
To see the circle sate, of all unseen.
Sated at length they rise, and bid prepare
An eve-repast, with equal cost and care:
But vengeful Pallas, with preventing speed,
A feast proportion’d to their crimes decreed;
A feast of death, the feasters doom’d to bleed!







And Pallas now, to raise the rivals’ fires,
With her own art Penelope inspires
Who now can bend Ulysses’ bow, and wing
The well-aim’d arrow through the distant ring,
Shall end the strife, and win the imperial dame:
But discord and black death await the game!

The prudent queen the lofty stair ascends:
At distance due a virgin-train attends;
A brazen key she held, the handle turn’d,
With steel and polish’d elephant adorn’d:
Swift to the inmost room she bent her way,
Where, safe reposed, the royal treasures lay:
There shone high heap’d the labour’d brass and ore,
And there the bow which great Ulysses bore;
And there the quiver, where now guiltless slept
Those winged deaths that many a matron wept.

This gift, long since when Sparta’s shore he trod,
On young Ulysses Iphitus bestowed:
Beneath Orsilochus’ roof they met;
One loss was private, one a public debt;
Messena’s state from Ithaca detains
Three hundred sheep, and all the shepherd swains;
And to the youthful prince to urge the laws,
The king and elders trust their common cause.
But Iphitus, employed on other cares,
Search’d the wide country for his wandering mares,
And mules, the strongest of the labouring kind;
Hapless to search; more hapless still to find!
For journeying on to Hercules, at length
That lawless wretch, that man of brutal strength,
Deaf to Heaven’s voice, the social rites transgress’d;
And for the beauteous mares destroy’d his guest.
He gave the bow; and on Ulysses’ part
Received a pointed sword, and missile dart:
Of luckless friendship on a foreign shore
Their first, last pledges! for they met no more.
The bow, bequeath’d by this unhappy hand,
Ulysses bore not from his native land;
Nor in the front of battle taught to bend,
But kept in dear memorial of his friend.

Now gently winding up the fair ascent,
By many an easy step the matron went;
Then o’er the pavement glides with grace divine
(With polish’d oak the level pavements shine);
The folding gates a dazzling light display’d,
With pomp of various architrave o’erlaid.
The bolt, obedient to the silken string,
Forsakes the staple as she pulls the ring;
The wards respondent to the key turn round;
The bars fall back; the flying valves resound;
Loud as a bull makes hill and valley ring,
So roar’d the lock when it released the spring.
She moves majestic through the wealthy room,
Where treasured garments cast a rich perfume;
There from the column where aloft it hung,
Reach’d in its splendid case, the bow unstrung;
Across her knees she laid the well-known bow,
And pensive sate, and tears began to flow.
To full satiety of grief she mourns,
Then silent to the joyous hall returns,
To the proud suitors bears in pensive state
The unbended bow, and arrows winged with fate.

Behind, her train the polish’d coffer brings,
Which held the alternate brass and silver rings.
Full in the portal the chaste queen appears,
And with her veil conceals the coming tears:
On either side awaits a virgin fair;
While thus the matron, with majestic air:

“Say you, when these forbidden walls inclose,
For whom my victims bleed, my vintage flows:
If these neglected, faded charms can move?
Or is it but a vain pretence, you love?
If I the prize, if me you seek to wife,
Hear the conditions, and commence the strife.
Who first Ulysses’ wondrous bow shall bend,
And through twelve ringlets the fleet arrow send;
Him will I follow, and forsake my home,
For him forsake this loved, this wealthy dome,
Long, long the scene of all my past delight,
And still to last, the vision of my night!”

Graceful she said, and bade Eumaeus show
The rival peers the ringlets and the bow.
From his full eyes the tears unbidden spring,
Touch’d at the dear memorials of his king.
Philaetius too relents, but secret shed
The tender drops. Antinous saw, and said:

“Hence to your fields, ye rustics! hence away,
Nor stain with grief the pleasures of the day;
Nor to the royal heart recall in vain
The sad remembrance of a perish’d man.
Enough her precious tears already flow—
Or share the feast with due respect; or go
To weep abroad, and leave to us the bow,
No vulgar task! Ill suits this courtly crew
That stubborn horn which brave Ulysses drew.
I well remember (for I gazed him o’er
While yet a child), what majesty he bore!
And still (all infant as I was) retain
The port, the strength, the grandeur of the man.”

He said, but in his soul fond joys arise,
And his proud hopes already win the prize.
To speed the flying shaft through every ring,
Wretch! is not thine: the arrows of the king
Shall end those hopes, and fate is on the wing!

Then thus Telemachus: “Some god I find
With pleasing frenzy has possess’d my mind;
When a loved mother threatens to depart,
Why with this ill-timed gladness leaps my heart?
Come then, ye suitors! and dispute a prize
Richer than all the Achaian state supplies,
Than all proud Argos, or Mycaena knows,
Than all our isles or continents inclose;
A woman matchless, and almost divine,
Fit for the praise of every tongue but mine.
No more excuses then, no more delay;
Haste to the trial—Lo! I lead the way.

“I too may try, and if this arm can wing
The feather’d arrow through the destined ring,
Then if no happier night the conquest boast,
I shall not sorrow for a mother lost;
But, bless’d in her, possess those arms alone,
Heir of my father’s strength, as well as throne.”

He spoke; then rising, his broad sword unbound,
And cast his purple garment on the ground.
A trench he open’d: in a line he placed.
The level axes, and the points made fast
(His perfect skill the wondering gazers eyed,
The game as yet unseen, as yet untried).
Then, with a manly pace, he took his stand:
And grasp’d the bow, and twang’d it in his hand.
Three times, with beating heart, he made essay:
Three times, unequal to the task, gave way;
A modest boldness on his cheek appear’d:
And thrice he hoped, and thrice again he fear’d.
The fourth had drawn it. The great sire with joy
Beheld, but with a sign forbade the boy.
His ardour straight the obedient prince suppress’d,
And, artful, thus the suitor-train address’d:

“O lay the cause on youth yet immature!
(For heaven forbid such weakness should endure!)
How shall this arm, unequal to the bow,
Retort an insult, or repel a foe?
But you! whom Heaven with better nerves has bless’d,
Accept the trial, and the prize contest.”

He cast the bow before him, and apart
Against the polish’d quiver propp’d the dart.
Resuming then his seat, Eupithes’ son,
The bold Antinous, to the rest begun:
“From where the goblet first begins to flow,
From right to left in order take the bow;
And prove your several strengths.” The princes heard
And first Leiodes, blameless priest, appear’d:
The eldest born of Œnops’ noble race,
Who next the goblet held his holy place:
He, only he, of all the suitor throng,
Their deeds detested, and abjured the wrong.
With tender hands the stubborn horn he strains,
The stubborn horn resisted all his pains!
Already in despair he gives it o’er:
“Take it who will (he cries), I strive no more,
What numerous deaths attend this fatal bow!
What souls and spirits shall it send below!
Better, indeed, to die, and fairly give
Nature her debt, than disappointed live,
With each new sun to some new hope a prey,
Yet still to-morrow falser than to-day.
How long in vain Penelope we sought!
This bow shall ease us of that idle thought,
And send us with some humbler wife to live,
Whom gold shall gain, or destiny shall give.”

Thus speaking, on the floor the bow he placed
(With rich inlay the various floor was graced):
At distance far the feather’d shaft he throws,
And to the seat returns from whence he rose.

To him Antinous thus with fury said:
“What words ill-omen’d from thy lips have fled?
Thy coward-function ever is in fear!
Those arms are dreadful which thou canst not bear,
Why should this bow be fatal to the brave?
Because the priest is born a peaceful slave.
Mark then what others can.” He ended there,
And bade Melanthius a vast pile prepare;
He gives it instant flame, then fast beside
Spreads o’er an ample board a bullock’s hide.
With melted lard they soak the weapon o’er,
Chafe every knot, and supple every pore.
Vain all their art, and all their strength as vain;
The bow inflexible resists their pain.
The force of great Eurymachus alone
And bold Antinous, yet untired, unknown:
Those only now remain’d; but those confess’d
Of all the train the mightiest and the best.

Then from the hall, and from the noisy crew,
The masters of the herd and flock withdrew.
The king observes them, he the hall forsakes,
And, past the limits of the court, o’ertakes.
Then thus with accent mild Ulysses spoke:
“Ye faithful guardians of the herd and flock!
Shall I the secret of my breast conceal,
Or (as my soul now dictates) shall I tell?
Say, should some favouring god restore again
The lost Ulysses to his native reign,
How beat your hearts? what aid would you afford
To the proud suitors, or your ancient lord?”

Philaetius thus: “O were thy word not vain!
Would mighty Jove restore that man again!
These aged sinews, with new vigour strung,
In his blest cause should emulate the young.”
With equal vows Eumaeus too implored
Each power above, with wishes for his lord.

He saw their secret souls, and thus began:
“Those vows the gods accord; behold the man!
Your own Ulysses! twice ten years detain’d
By woes and wanderings from this hapless land:
At length he comes; but comes despised, unknown,
And finding faithful you, and you alone.
All else have cast him from their very thought,
E’en in their wishes and their prayers forgot!
Hear then, my friends: If Jove this arm succeed,
And give yon impious revellers to bleed,
My care shall be to bless your future lives
With large possessions and with faithful wives;
Fast by my palace shall your domes ascend,
And each on young Telemachus attend,
And each be call’d his brother and my friend.
To give you firmer faith, now trust your eye;
Lo! the broad scar indented on my thigh,
When with Autolycus’ sons, of yore,
On Parnass’ top I chased the tusky boar.”
His ragged vest then drawn aside disclosed
The sign conspicuous, and the scar exposed:
Eager they view’d, with joy they stood amazed
With tearful eyes o’er all their master gazed:
Around his neck their longing arms they cast,
His head, his shoulders, and his knees embraced;
Tears followed tears; no word was in their power;
In solemn silence fell the kindly shower.
The king too weeps, the king too grasps their hands;
And moveless, as a marble fountain, stands.

Thus had their joy wept down the setting sun,
But first the wise man ceased, and thus begun:
“Enough—on other cares your thought employ,
For danger waits on all untimely joy.
Full many foes and fierce, observe us near;
Some may betray, and yonder walls may hear.
Re-enter then, not all at once, but stay
Some moments you, and let me lead the way.
To me, neglected as I am I know
The haughty suitors will deny the bow;
But thou, Eumaeus, as ’tis borne away,
Thy master’s weapon to his hand convey.
At every portal let some matron wait,
And each lock fast the well-compacted gate:
Close let them keep, whate’er invades their ear;
Though arms, or shouts, or dying groans they hear.
To thy strict charge, Philaetius, we consign
The court’s main gate: to guard that pass be thine.”

This said, he first return’d; the faithful swains
At distance follow, as their king ordains.
Before the flame Eurymachus now stands,
And turns the bow, and chafes it with his hands
Still the tough bow unmoved. The lofty man
Sigh’d from his mighty soul, and thus began:

“I mourn the common cause: for, oh, my friends,
On me, on all, what grief, what shame attends!
Not the lost nuptials can affect me more
(For Greece has beauteous dames on every shore),
But baffled thus! confess’d so far below
Ulysses’ strength, as not to bend his bow!
How shall all ages our attempt deride!
Our weakness scorn!” Antinous thus replied:

“Not so, Eurymachus: that no man draws
The wondrous bow, attend another cause.
Sacred to Phœbus is the solemn day,
Which thoughtless we in games would waste away:
Till the next dawn this ill-timed strife forego,
And here leave fixed the ringlets in a row.
Now bid the sewer approach, and let us join
In due libations, and in rites divine,
So end our night: before the day shall spring,
The choicest offerings let Melanthius bring:
Let then to Phœbus’ name the fatted thighs
Feed the rich smokes high curling to the skies.
So shall the patron of these arts bestow
(For his the gift) the skill to bend the bow.”

They heard well pleased: the ready heralds bring
The cleansing waters from the limpid spring:
The goblet high with rosy wine they crown’d,
In order circling to the peers around.
That rite complete, uprose the thoughtful man,
And thus his meditated scheme began:

“If what I ask your noble minds approve,
Ye peers and rivals in the royal love!
Chief, if it hurt not great Antinous’ ear
(Whose sage decision I with wonder hear),
And if Eurymachus the motion please:
Give Heaven this day and rest the bow in peace.
To-morrow let your arms dispute the prize,
And take it he, the favour’d of the skies!
But, since till then this trial you delay,
Trust it one moment to my hands to-day:
Fain would I prove, before your judging eyes,
What once I was, whom wretched you despise:
If yet this arm its ancient force retain;
Or if my woes (a long-continued train)
And wants and insults, make me less than man.”

Rage flash’d in lightning from the suitors’ eyes,
Yet mixed with terror at the bold emprise.
Antinous then: “O miserable guest!
Is common sense quite banish’d from thy breast?
Sufficed it not, within the palace placed,
To sit distinguish’d, with our presence graced,
Admitted here with princes to confer,
A man unknown, a needy wanderer?
To copious wine this insolence we owe,
And much thy betters wine can overthrow:
The great Eurytion, when this frenzy stung,
Pirithous’ roofs with frantic riot rung;
Boundless the Centaur raged; till one and all
The heroes rose, and dragg’d him from the hall;
His nose they shorten’d, and his ears they slit,
And sent him sober’d home, with better wit.
Hence with long war the double race was cursed,
Fatal to all, but to the aggressor first.
Such fate I prophesy our guest attends,
If here this interdicted bow he bends:
Nor shall these walls such insolence contain:
The first fair wind transports him o’er the main,
Where Echetus to death the guilty brings
(The worst of mortals, e’en the worst of kings).
Better than that, if thou approve our cheer;
Cease the mad strife and share our bounty here.”

To this the queen her just dislike express’d:

“‘Tis impious, prince, to harm the stranger-guest,
Base to insult who bears a suppliant’s name,
And some respect Telemachus may claim.
What if the immortals on the man bestow
Sufficient strength to draw the mighty bow?
Shall I, a queen, by rival chiefs adored,
Accept a wandering stranger for my lord?
A hope so idle never touch’d his brain:
Then ease your bosoms of a fear so vain.
Far be he banish’d from this stately scene
Who wrongs his princess with a thought so mean.”

“O fair! and wisest of so fair a kind!
(Respectful thus Eurymachus rejoin’d,)
Moved by no weak surmise, but sense of shame,
We dread the all-arraigning voice of Fame:
We dread the censure of the meanest slave,
The weakest woman: all can wrong the brave.
‘Behold what wretches to the bed pretend
Of that brave chief whose bow they could not bend!
In came a beggar of the strolling crew,
And did what all those princes could not do.’
Thus will the common voice our deed defame,
And thus posterity upbraid our name.”

To whom the queen: “If fame engage your views,
Forbear those acts which infamy pursues;
Wrong and oppression no renown can raise;
Know, friend! that virtue is the path to praise.
The stature of our guest, his port, his face,
Speak him descended from no vulgar race.
To him the bow, as he desires, convey;
And to his hand if Phœbus give the day,
Hence, to reward his merit, be shall bear
A two-edged falchion and a shining spear,
Embroider’d sandals, a rich cloak and vest,
A safe conveyance to his port of rest.”

“O royal mother! ever-honour’d name!
Permit me (cries Telemachus) to claim
A son’s just right. No Grecian prince but I
Has power this bow to grant or to deny.
Of all that Ithaca’s rough hills contain,
And all wide Elis’ courser-breeding plain,
To me alone my father’s arms descend;
And mine alone they are, to give or lend.
Retire, O queen! thy household task resume,
Tend, with thy maids, the labours of thy loom;
The bow, the darts, and arms of chivalry,
These cares to man belong, and most to me.”

Mature beyond his years, the queen admired
His sage reply, and with her train retired;
There in her chamber as she sate apart,
Revolved his words, and placed them in her heart.
On her Ulysses then she fix’d her soul;
Down her fair cheek the tears abundant roll,
Till gentle Pallas, piteous of her cries,
In slumber closed her silver-streaming eyes.

Now through the press the bow Eumaeus bore,
And all was riot, noise, and wild uproar.
“Hold! lawless rustic! whither wilt thou go?
To whom, insensate, dost thou bear the bow?
Exiled for this to some sequester’d den,
Far from the sweet society of men,
To thy own dogs a prey thou shalt be made;
If Heaven and Phœbus lend the suitors aid.”
Thus they. Aghast he laid the weapon down,
But bold Telemachus thus urged him on:
“Proceed, false slave, and slight their empty words:
What! hopes the fool to please so many lords?
Young as I am, thy prince’s vengeful hand
Stretch’d forth in wrath shall drive thee from the land.
Oh! could the vigour of this arm as well
The oppressive suitors from my walls expel!
Then what a shoal of lawless men should go
To fill with tumult the dark courts below!”

The suitors with a scornful smile survey
The youth, indulging in the genial day.
Eumaeus, thus encouraged, hastes to bring
The strifeful bow and gives it to the king.
Old Euryclea calling then aside,
“Hear what Telemachus enjoins (he cried):
At every portal let some matron wait,
And each lock fast the well-compacted gate;
And if unusual sounds invade their ear,
If arms, or shouts, or dying groans they hear,
Let none to call or issue forth presume,
But close attend the labours of the loom.”

Her prompt obedience on his order waits;
Closed in an instant were the palace gates.
In the same moment forth Philaetius flies,
Secures the court, and with a cable ties
The utmost gate (the cable strongly wrought
Of Byblos’ reed, a ship from Egypt brought);
Then unperceived and silent at the board
His seat he takes, his eyes upon his lord.

And now his well-known bow the master bore,
Turn’d on all sides, and view’d it o’er and o’er;
Lest time or worms had done the weapon wrong,
Its owner absent, and untried so long.
While some deriding—“How he turns the bow!
Some other like it sure the man must know,
Or else would copy; or in bows he deals;
Perhaps he makes them, or perhaps he steals.”
“Heaven to this wretch (another cried) be kind!
And bless, in all to which he stands inclined.
With such good fortune as he now shall find.”

Heedless he heard them: but disdain’d reply;
The bow perusing with exactest eye.
Then, as some heavenly minstrel, taught to sing
High notes responsive to the trembling string,
To some new strain when he adapts the lyre,
Or the dumb lute refits with vocal wire,
Relaxes, strains, and draws them to and fro;
So the great master drew the mighty bow,
And drew with ease. One hand aloft display’d
The bending horns, and one the string essay’d.
From his essaying hand the string, let fly,
Twang’d short and sharp like the shrill swallow’s cry.
A general horror ran through all the race,
Sunk was each heart, and pale was every face,
Signs from above ensued: the unfolding sky
In lightning burst; Jove thunder’d from on high.
Fired at the call of heaven’s almighty Lord,
He snatch’d the shaft that glitter’d on the board
(Fast by, the rest lay sleeping in the sheath,
But soon to fly the messengers of death).

Now sitting as he was, the cord he drew,
Through every ringlet levelling his view:
Then notch’d the shaft, released, and gave it wing;
The whizzing arrow vanished from the string,
Sung on direct, and threaded every ring.
The solid gate its fury scarcely bounds;
Pierced through and through the solid gate resounds,
Then to the prince: “Nor have I wrought thee shame;
Nor err’d this hand unfaithful to its aim;
Nor prov’d the toil too hard; nor have I lost
That ancient vigour, once my pride and boast.
Ill I deserved these haughty peers’ disdain;
Now let them comfort their dejected train,
In sweet repast their present hour employ,
Nor wait till evening for the genial joy:
Then to the lute’s soft voice prolong the night;
Music, the banquet’s most refined delight.”

He said, then gave a nod; and at the word
Telemachus girds on his shining sword.
Fast by his father’s side he takes his stand:
The beamy javelin lightens in his hand.







Then fierce the hero o’er the threshold strode;
Stripp’d of his rags, he blazed out like a god.
Full in their face the lifted bow he bore,
And quiver’d deaths, a formidable store;
Before his feet the rattling shower he threw,
And thus, terrific, to the suitor-crew:

“One venturous game this hand hath won to-day,
Another, princes! yet remains to play;
Another mark our arrow must attain.
Phœbus, assist! nor be the labour vain.”
Swift as the word the parting arrow sings,
And bears thy fate, Antinous, on its wings:
Wretch that he was, of unprophetic soul!
High in his hands he rear’d the golden bowl!
E’en then to drain it lengthen’d out his breath;
Changed to the deep, the bitter draught of death:
For fate who fear’d amidst a feastful band?
And fate to numbers, by a single hand?
Full through his throat Ulysses’ weapon pass’d,
And pierced his neck. He falls, and breathes his last.
The tumbling goblet the wide floor o’erflows,
A stream of gore burst spouting from his nose;
Grim in convulsive agonies be sprawls:
Before him spurn’d the loaded table falls,
And spreads the pavement with a mingled flood
Of floating meats, and wine, and human blood.
Amazed, confounded, as they saw him fall,
Up rose the throngs tumultuous round the hall:
O’er all the dome they cast a haggard eye,
Each look’d for arms—in vain; no arms were nigh:
“Aim’st thou at princes? (all amazed they said;)
Thy last of games unhappy hast thou play’d;
Thy erring shaft has made our bravest bleed,
And death, unlucky guest, attends thy deed.
Vultures shall tear thee.” Thus incensed they spoke,
While each to chance ascribed the wondrous stroke:
Blind as they were: for death e’en now invades
His destined prey, and wraps them all in shades.
Then, grimly frowning, with a dreadful look,
That wither’d all their hearts, Ulysses spoke:

“Dogs, ye have had your day! ye fear’d no more
Ulysses vengeful from the Trojan shore;
While, to your lust and spoil a guardless prey,
Our house, our wealth, our helpless handmaids lay:
Not so content, with bolder frenzy fired,
E’en to our bed presumptuous you aspired:
Laws or divine or human fail’d to move,
Or shame of men, or dread of gods above;
Heedless alike of infamy or praise,
Or Fame’s eternal voice in future days;
The hour of vengeance, wretches, now is come;
Impending fate is yours, and instant doom.”

Thus dreadful he. Confused the suitors stood,
From their pale cheeks recedes the flying blood:
Trembling they sought their guilty heads to hide.
Alone the bold Eurymachus replied:

“If, as thy words import (he thus began),
Ulysses lives, and thou the mighty man,
Great are thy wrongs, and much hast thou sustain’d
In thy spoil’d palace, and exhausted land;
The cause and author of those guilty deeds,
Lo! at thy feet unjust Antinous bleeds
Not love, but wild ambition was his guide;
To slay thy son, thy kingdom to divide,
These were his aims; but juster Jove denied.
Since cold in death the offender lies, oh spare
Thy suppliant people, and receive their prayer!
Brass, gold, and treasures, shall the spoil defray,
Two hundred oxen every prince shall pay:
The waste of years refunded in a day.
Till then thy wrath is just.” Ulysses burn’d
With high disdain, and sternly thus return’d:

“All, all the treasure that enrich’d our throne
Before your rapines, join’d with all your own,
If offer’d, vainly should for mercy call;
’Tis you that offer, and I scorn them all;
Your blood is my demand, your lives the prize,
Till pale as yonder wretch each suitor lies.
Hence with those coward terms; or fight or fly;
This choice is left you, to resist or die:
And die I trust ye shall.” He sternly spoke:
With guilty fears the pale assembly shook.
Alone Eurymachus exhorts the train:
“Yon archer, comrades, will not shoot in vain;
But from the threshold shall his darts be sped,
(Whoe’er he be), till every prince lie dead?
Be mindful of yourselves, draw forth your swords,
And to his shafts obtend these ample boards
(So need compels). Then, all united, strive
The bold invader from his post to drive:
The city roused shall to our rescue haste,
And this mad archer soon have shot his last.”

Swift as he spoke, he drew his traitor sword,
And like a lion rush’d against his lord:
The wary chief the rushing foe repress’d,
Who met the point and forced it in his breast:
His falling hand deserts the lifted sword,
And prone he falls extended o’er the board!
Before him wide, in mix’d effusion roll
The untasted viands, and the jovial bowl.
Full through his liver pass’d the mortal wound,
With dying rage his forehead beats the ground;
He spurn’d the seat with fury as he fell,
And the fierce soul to darkness dived, and hell.
Next bold Amphinomus his arm extends
To force the pass; the godlike man defends.
Thy spear, Telemachus, prevents the attack,
The brazen weapon driving through his back.
Thence through his breast its bloody passage tore;
Flat falls he thundering on the marble floor,
And his crush’d forehead marks the stone with gore.
He left his javelin in the dead, for fear
The long encumbrance of the weighty spear
To the fierce foe advantage might afford,
To rush between and use the shorten’d sword.
With speedy ardour to his sire he flies,
And, “Arm, great father! arm (in haste he cries).
Lo, hence I run for other arms to wield,
For missive javelins, and for helm and shield;
Fast by our side let either faithful swain
In arms attend us, and their part sustain.”

“Haste, and return (Ulysses made reply)
While yet the auxiliar shafts this hand supply;
Lest thus alone, encounter’d by an host,
Driven from the gate, the important past be lost.”

With speed Telemachus obeys, and flies
Where piled in heaps the royal armour lies;
Four brazen helmets, eight refulgent spears,
And four broad bucklers to his sire he bears:
At once in brazen panoply they shone.
At once each servant braced his armour on;
Around their king a faithful guard they stand.
While yet each shaft flew deathful from his hand:
Chief after chief expired at every wound,
And swell’d the bleeding mountain on the ground.
Soon as his store of flying fates was spent.
Against the wall he set the bow unbent;
And now his shoulders bear the massy shield,
And now his hands two beamy javelins wield:
He frowns beneath his nodding plume, that play’d
O’er the high crest, and cast a dreadful shade.

There stood a window near, whence looking down
From o’er the porch appear’d the subject town.
A double strength of valves secured the place,
A high and narrow, but the only pass:
The cautious king, with all-preventing care,
To guard that outlet, placed Eumaeus there;
When Agelaus thus: “Has none the sense
To mount yon window, and alarm from thence
The neighbour-town? the town shall force the door,
And this bold archer soon shall shoot no more.”
Melanthius then: “That outlet to the gate
So near adjoins, that one may guard the strait.
But other methods of defence remain;
Myself with arms can furnish all the train;
Stores from the royal magazine I bring,
And their own darts shall pierce the prince and king.”

He said; and mounting up the lofty stairs,
Twelve shields, twelve lances, and twelve helmets bears:
All arm, and sudden round the hall appears
A blaze of bucklers, and a wood of spears.

The hero stands oppress’d with mighty woe,
On every side he sees the labour grow;
“Oh cursed event! and oh unlook’d for aid!
Melanthius or the women have betray’d—
Oh my dear son!”—The father with a sigh
Then ceased; the filial virtue made reply;

“Falsehood is folly, and ’tis just to own
The fault committed: this was mine alone;
My haste neglected yonder door to bar,
And hence the villain has supplied their war.
Run, good Eumaeus, then, and (what before
I thoughtless err’d in) well secure that door:
Learn, if by female fraud this deed were done,
Or (as my thought misgives) by Dolius’ son.”

While yet they spoke, in quest of arms again
To the high chamber stole the faithless swain,
Not unobserved. Eumaeus watchful eyed,
And thus address’d Ulysses near his side:

“The miscreant we suspected takes that way;
Him, if this arm be powerful, shall I slay?
Or drive him hither, to receive the meed
From thy own hand, of this detested deed?”

“Not so (replied Ulysses); leave him there,
For us sufficient is another care;
Within the structure of this palace wall
To keep enclosed his masters till they fall.
Go you, and seize the felon; backward bind
His arms and legs, and fix a plank behind:
On this his body by strong cords extend,
And on a column near the roof suspend:
So studied tortures his vile days shall end.”

The ready swains obey’d with joyful haste,
Behind the felon unperceived they pass’d,
As round the room in quest of arms he goes
(The half-shut door conceal’d his lurking foes):
One hand sustain’d a helm, and one the shield
Which old Laertes wont in youth to wield,
Cover’d with dust, with dryness chapp’d and worn,
The brass corroded, and the leather torn.
Thus laden, o’er the threshold as he stepp’d,
Fierce on the villain from each side they leap’d,
Back by the hair the trembling dastard drew,
And down reluctant on the pavement threw.
Active and pleased the zealous swains fulfil
At every point their master’s rigid will;
First, fast behind, his hands and feet they bound,
Then straighten’d cords involved his body round;
So drawn aloft, athwart the column tied,
The howling felon swung from side to side.

Eumaeus scoffing then with keen disdain:
“There pass thy pleasing night, O gentle swain!
On that soft pillow, from that envied height,
First may’st thou see the springing dawn of light;
So timely rise, when morning streaks the east,
To drive thy victims to the suitors’ feast.”

This said, they, left him, tortured as he lay,
Secured the door, and hasty strode away:
Each, breathing death, resumed his dangerous post
Near great Ulysses; four against an host,
When lo! descending to her hero’s aid,
Jove’s daughter, Pallas, War’s triumphant maid:
In Mentor’s friendly form she join’d his side:
Ulysses saw, and thus with transport cried:

“Come, ever welcome, and thy succour lend;
O every sacred name in one, my friend!
Early we loved, and long our loves have grown;
Whate’er through life’s whole series I have done,
Or good, or grateful, now to mind recall,
And, aiding this one hour, repay it all.”

Thus he; but pleasing hopes his bosom warm
Of Pallas latent in the friendly form.
The adverse host the phantom-warrior eyed,
And first, loud-threatening, Agelaus cried:

“Mentor, beware, nor let that tongue persuade
Thy frantic arm to lend Ulysses aid;
Our force successful shall our threat make good,
And with the sire and son commix thy blood.
What hopest thou here? Thee first the sword shall slay,
Then lop thy whole posterity away;
Far hence thy banish’d consort shall we send;
With his thy forfeit lands and treasures blend;
Thus, and thus only, shalt thou join thy friend.”

His barbarous insult even the goddess fires,
Who thus the warrior to revenge inspires:

“Art thou Ulysses? where then shall we find
The patient body and the constant mind?
That courage, once the Trojans’ daily dread,
Known nine long years, and felt by heroes dead?
And where that conduct, which revenged the lust
Of Priam’s race, and laid proud Troy in dust?
If this, when Helen was the cause, were done;
What for thy country now, thy queen, thy son?
Rise then in combat, at my side attend;
Observe what vigour gratitude can lend,
And foes how weak, opposed against a friend!”

She spoke; but willing longer to survey
The sire and son’s great acts withheld the day!
By farther toils decreed the brave to try,
And level poised the wings of victory;
Then with a change of form eludes their sight,
Perch’d like a swallow on a rafter’s height,
And unperceived enjoys the rising fight.

Damastor’s son, bold Agelaus, leads,
The guilty war, Eurynomus succeeds;
With these, Pisander, great Polyctor’s son,
Sage Polybus, and stern Amphimedon,
With Demoptolemus: these six survive:
The best of all the shafts had left alive.
Amidst the carnage, desperate as they stand,
Thus Agelaus roused the lagging band:

“The hour has come, when yon fierce man no more
With bleeding princes shall bestrew the floor;
Lo! Mentor leaves him with an empty boast;
The four remain, but four against an host.
Let each at once discharge the deadly dart,
One sure of six shall reach Ulysses’ heart:
The rest must perish, their great leader slain:
Thus shall one stroke the glory lost regain.”

Then all at once their mingled lances threw,
And thirsty all of one man’s blood they flew;
In vain! Minerva turned them with her breath,
And scattered short, or wide, the points of death!
With deaden’d sound one on the threshold falls,
One strikes the gate, one rings against the walls:
The storm passed innocent. The godlike man
Now loftier trod, and dreadful thus began:
“‘Tis now (brave friends) our turn, at once to throw,
(So speed them Heaven) our javelins at the foe.
That impious race to all their past misdeeds
Would add our blood, injustice still proceeds.”

He spoke: at once their fiery lances flew:
Great Demoptolemus Ulysses slew;
Euryades received the prince’s dart;
The goatherd’s quiver’d in Pisander’s heart;
Fierce Elatus by thine, Eumaeus, falls;
Their fall in thunder echoes round the walls.
The rest retreat: the victors now advance,
Each from the dead resumes his bloody lance.
Again the foe discharge the steely shower;
Again made frustrate by the virgin-power.
Some, turn’d by Pallas, on the threshold fall,
Some wound the gate, some ring against the wall;
Some weak, or ponderous with the brazen head,
Drop harmless on the pavement, sounding dead.

Then bold Amphimedon his javelin cast:
Thy hand, Telemachus, it lightly razed:
And from Ctesippus’ arm the spear elanced:
On good Eumaeus’ shield and shoulder glanced;
Not lessened of their force (so light the wound)
Each sung along and dropped upon the ground.
Fate doom’d thee next, Eurydamus, to bear,
Thy death ennobled by Ulysses’ spear.
By the bold son Amphimedon was slain,
And Polybus renown’d, the faithful swain.
Pierced through the breast the rude Ctesippus bled,
And thus Philaetius gloried o’er the dead:

“There end thy pompous vaunts and high disdain;
O sharp in scandal, voluble and vain!
How weak is mortal pride! To Heaven alone
The event of actions and our fates are known:
Scoffer, behold what gratitude we bear:
The victim’s heel is answered with this spear.”

Ulysses brandish’d high his vengeful steel,
And Damastorides that instant fell:
Fast by Leocritus expiring lay,
The prince’s javelin tore its bloody way
Through all his bowels: down he tumbled prone,
His batter’d front and brains besmear the stone.

Now Pallas shines confess’d; aloft she spreads
The arm of vengeance o’er their guilty heads:
The dreadful aegis blazes in their eye:
Amazed they see, they tremble, and they fly:
Confused, distracted, through the rooms they fling:
Like oxen madden’d by the breeze’s sting,
When sultry days, and long, succeed the gentle spring,
Not half so keen fierce vultures of the chase
Stoop from the mountains on the feather’d race,
When, the wide field extended snares beset,
With conscious dread they shun the quivering net:
No help, no flight; but wounded every way,
Headlong they drop; the fowlers seize their prey.
On all sides thus they double wound on wound,
In prostrate heaps the wretches beat the ground,
Unmanly shrieks precede each dying groan,
And a red deluge floats the reeking stone.

Leiodes first before the victor falls:
The wretched augur thus for mercy calls:
“Oh gracious hear, nor let thy suppliant bleed;
Still undishonoured, or by word or deed,
Thy house, for me remains; by me repress’d
Full oft was check’d the injustice of the rest:
Averse they heard me when I counselled well,
Their hearts were harden’d, and they justly fell.
O spare an augur’s consecrated head,
Nor add the blameless to the guilty dead.”

“Priest as thou art! for that detested band
Thy lying prophecies deceived the land;
Against Ulysses have thy vows been made,
For them thy daily orisons were paid:
Yet more, e’en to our bed thy pride aspires:
One common crime one common fate requires.”

Thus speaking, from the ground the sword he took
Which Agelaus’ dying hand forsook:
Full through his neck the weighty falchion sped;
Along the pavement roll’d the muttering head.

Phemius alone the hand of vengeance spared,
Phemius the sweet, the heaven-instructed bard.
Beside the gate the reverend minstrel stands;
The lyre now silent trembling in his hands;
Dubious to supplicate the chief, or fly
To Jove’s inviolable altar nigh,
Where oft Laertes holy vows had paid,
And oft Ulysses smoking victims laid.
His honour’d harp with care he first set down,
Between the laver and the silver throne;
Then prostrate stretch’d before the dreadful man,
Persuasive thus, with accent soft began:

“O king! to mercy be thy soul inclined,
And spare the poet’s ever-gentle kind.
A deed like this thy future fame would wrong,
For dear to gods and men is sacred song.
Self-taught I sing; by Heaven, and Heaven alone,
The genuine seeds of poesy are sown:
And (what the gods bestow) the lofty lay
To gods alone and godlike worth we pay.
Save then the poet, and thyself reward!
’Tis thine to merit, mine is to record.
That here I sung, was force, and not desire;
This hand reluctant touch’d the warbling wire;
And let thy son attest, nor sordid pay,
Nor servile flattery, stain’d the moral lay.”

The moving words Telemachus attends,
His sire approaches, and the bard defends.
“O mix not, father, with those impious dead
The man divine! forbear that sacred head;
Medon, the herald, too, our arms may spare,
Medon, who made my infancy his care;
If yet he breathes, permit thy son to give
Thus much to gratitude, and bid him live.”

Beneath a table, trembling with dismay,
Couch’d close to earth, unhappy Medon lay,
Wrapp’d in a new-slain ox’s ample hide;
Swift at the word he cast his screen aside,
Sprung to the prince, embraced his knee with tears,
And thus with grateful voice address’d his ears

“O prince! O friend! lo, here thy Medon stands
Ah stop the hero’s unresisted hands,
Incensed too justly by that impious brood,
Whose guilty glories now are set in blood.”
To whom Ulysses with a pleasing eye:

“Be bold, on friendship and my son rely;
Live, an example for the world to read,
How much more safe the good than evil deed:
Thou, with the heaven-taught bard, in peace resort
From blood and carnage to yon open court:
Me other work requires.” With timorous awe
From the dire scene the exempted two withdraw,
Scarce sure of life, look round, and trembling move
To the bright altars of Protector Jove.

Meanwhile Ulysses search’d the dome, to find
If yet there live of all the offending kind.
Not one! complete the bloody tale he found,
All steep’d in blood, all gasping on the ground.
So, when by hollow shores the fisher-train
Sweep with their arching nets the roaring main,
And scarce the meshy toils the copious draught contain,
All naked of their element, and bare,
The fishes pant, and gasp in thinner air;
Wide o’er the sands are spread the stiffening prey,
Till the warm sun exhales their soul away.

And now the king commands his son to call
Old Euryclea to the deathful hall:
The son observant not a moment stays;
The aged governess with speed obeys;
The sounding portals instant they display;
The matron moves, the prince directs the way.
On heaps of death the stern Ulysses stood,
All black with dust, and cover’d thick with blood.
So the grim lion from the slaughter comes,
Dreadful he glares, and terribly he foams,
His breast with marks of carnage painted o’er,
His jaws all dropping with the bull’s black gore.

Soon as her eyes the welcome object met,
The guilty fall’n, the mighty deed complete;
A scream of joy her feeble voice essay’d;
The hero check’d her, and composedly said.

“Woman, experienced as thou art, control
Indecent joy, and feast thy secret soul.
To insult the dead is cruel and unjust;
Fate and their crime have sunk them to the dust.
Nor heeded these the censure of mankind,
The good and bad were equal in their mind
Justly the price of worthlessness they paid,
And each now wails an unlamented shade.
But thou sincere! O Euryclea, say,
What maids dishonour us, and what obey?”

Then she: “In these thy kingly walls remain
(My son) full fifty of the handmaid train,
Taught by my care to cull the fleece or weave,
And servitude with pleasing tasks deceive;
Of these, twice six pursue their wicked way,
Nor me, nor chaste Penelope obey;
Nor fits it that Telemachus command
(Young as he is) his mother’s female band.
Hence to the upper chambers let me fly
Where slumbers soft now close the royal eye;
There wake her with the news”—the matron cried.
“Not so (Ulysses, more sedate, replied),
Bring first the crew who wrought these guilty deeds.”
In haste the matron parts: the king proceeds;
“Now to dispose the dead, the care remains
To you, my son, and you, my faithfull swains;
The offending females to that task we doom,
To wash, to scent, and purify the room;
These (every table cleansed, and every throne,
And all the melancholy labour done)
Drive to yon court, without the palace wall,
There the revenging sword shall smite them all;
So with the suitors let them mix in dust,
Stretch’d in a long oblivion of their lust.”
He said: the lamentable train appear,
Each vents a groan, and drops a tender tear;
Each heaved her mournful burden, and beneath
The porch deposed the ghastly heap of death.
The chief severe, compelling each to move,
Urged the dire task imperious from above;
With thirsty sponge they rub the tables o’er
(The swains unite their toil); the walls, the floor,
Wash’d with the effusive wave, are purged of gore.
Once more the palace set in fair array,
To the base court the females take their way;
There compass’d close between the dome and wall
(Their life’s last scene) they trembling wait their fall.

Then thus the prince: “To these shall we afford
A fate so pure as by the martial sword?
To these, the nightly prostitutes to shame,
And base revilers of our house and name?”

Thus speaking, on the circling wall he strung
A ship’s tough cable from a column hung;
Near the high top he strain’d it strongly round,
Whence no contending foot could reach the ground.
Their heads above connected in a row,
They beat the air with quivering feet below:
Thus on some tree hung struggling in the snare,
The doves or thrushes flap their wings in air.
Soon fled the soul impure, and left behind
The empty corse to waver with the wind.

Then forth they led Melanthius, and began
Their bloody work; they lopp’d away the man,
Morsel for dogs! then trimm’d with brazen shears
The wretch, and shorten’d of his nose and ears;
His hands and feet last felt the cruel steel:
He roar’d, and torments gave his soul to hell.
They wash, and to Ulysses take their way:
So ends the bloody business of the day.

To Euryclea then address’d the king:
“Bring hither fire, and hither sulphur bring,
To purge the palace: then the queen attend,
And let her with her matron-train descend;
The matron-train, with all the virgin-band,
Assemble here, to learn their lord’s command.”

Then Euryclea: “Joyful I obey,
But cast those mean dishonest rags away;
Permit me first the royal robes to bring:
Ill suits this garb the shoulders of a king.”
“Bring sulphur straight, and fire” (the monarch cries).
She hears, and at the word obedient flies.
With fire and sulphur, cure of noxious fumes,
He purged the walls, and blood-polluted rooms.
Again the matron springs with eager pace,
And spreads her lord’s return from place to place.
They hear, rush forth, and instant round him stand,
A gazing throng, a torch in every hand.
They saw, they knew him, and with fond embrace
Each humbly kiss’d his knee, or hand, or face;
He knows them all, in all such truth appears,
E’en he indulges the sweet joy of tears.







Then to the queen, as in repose she lay,
The nurse with eager rapture speeds her way:
The transports of her faithful heart supply
A sudden youth, and give her wings to fly.

“And sleeps my child? (the reverend matron cries)
Ulysses lives! arise, my child, arise!
At length appears the long-expected hour!
Ulysses comes! the suitors are no more!
No more they view the golden light of day!
Arise, and bless thee with the glad survey?”

Touch’d at her words, the mournful queen rejoin’d:
“Ah! whither wanders thy distemper’d mind?
The righteous powers, who tread the starry skies,
The weak enlighten, and confound the wise,
And human thought, with unresisted sway,
Depress or raise, enlarge or take away:
Truth, by their high decree, thy voice forsakes,
And folly with the tongue of wisdom speaks.
Unkind, the fond illusion to impose!
Was it to flatter or deride my woes?
Never did I sleep so sweet enjoy,
Since my dear lord left Ithaca for Troy.
Why must I wake to grieve, and curse thy shore,
O Troy?—may never tongue pronounce thee more!
Begone! another might have felt our rage,
But age is sacred, and we spare thy age.”

To whom with warmth: “My soul a lie disdains;
Ulysses lives, thy own Ulysses reigns:
That stranger, patient of the suitors’ wrongs,
And the rude license of ungovern’d tongues!
He, he is thine! Thy son his latent guest
Long knew, but lock’d the secret in his breast:
With well concerted art to end his woes,
And burst at once in vengeance on the foes.”

While yet she spoke, the queen in transport sprung
Swift from the couch, and round the matron hung;
Fast from her eye descends the rolling tear:
“Say, once more say, is my Ulysses here?
How could that numerous and outrageous band
By one be slain, though by a hero’s hand?”

“I saw it not (she cries), but heard alone,
When death was busy, a loud dying groan;
The damsel-train turn’d pale at every wound,
Immured we sate, and catch’d each passing sound;
When death had seized her prey, thy son attends,
And at his nod the damsel-train descends;
There terrible in arms Ulysses stood,
And the dead suitors almost swam in blood:
Thy heart had leap’d the hero to survey,
Stern as the surly lion o’er his prey,
Glorious in gore, now with sulphereous fire
The dome he purges, now the flame aspires;
Heap’d lie the dead without the palace walls—
Haste, daughter, haste, thy own Ulysses calls!
Thy every wish the bounteous gods bestow;
Enjoy the present good, and former woe.
Ulysses lives, his vanquish’d foes to see;
He lives to thy Telemachus and thee!”

“Ah, no! (with sighs Penelope rejoin’d,)
Excess of joy disturbs thy wandering mind;
How blest this happy hour, should he appear,
Dear to us all, to me supremely dear;
Ah, no! some god the suitors death decreed,
Some god descends, and by his hand they bleed;
Blind! to contemn the stranger’s righteous cause,
And violate all hospitable laws!
The good they hated, and the powers defied!
But heaven is just, and by a god they died.
For never must Ulysses view this shore;
Never! the loved Ulysses is no more!”

“What words (the matron cries) have reach’d my ears?
Doubt we his presence, when he now appears!
Then hear conviction: Ere the fatal day
That forced Ulysses o’er the watery way,
A boar, fierce rushing in the sylvan war,
Plough’d half his thigh; I saw, I saw the scar,
And wild with transport had reveal’d the wound;
But ere I spoke, he rose, and check’d the sound.
Then, daughter, haste away! and if a lie
Flow from this tongue, then let thy servant die!”
To whom with dubious joy the queen replies:
“Wise is thy soul, but errors seize the wise;
The works of gods what mortal can survey?
Who knows their motives, who shall trace their way?
But learn we instant how the suitors trod
The paths of death, by man, or by a god.”
Thus speaks the queen, and no reply attends,
But with alternate joy and fear descends;
At every step debates her lord to prove;
Or, rushing to his arms, confess her love!
Then gliding through the marble valves, in state
Opposed, before the shining sire she sate.
The monarch, by a column high enthroned,
His eye withdrew, and fix’d it on the ground;
Curious to hear his queen the silence break:
Amazed she sate, and impotent to speak;
O’er all the man her eyes she rolls in vain,
Now hopes, now fears, now knows, then doubts again.
At length Telemachus: “Oh, who can find
A woman like Penelope unkind?
Why thus in silence? why with winning charms
Thus slow to fly with rapture to his arms?
Stubborn the breast that with no transport glows,
When twice ten years are pass’d of mighty woes;
To softness lost, to spousal love unknown,
The gods have formed that rigid heart of stone!”
“O my Telemachus! (the queen rejoin’d,)
Distracting fears confound my labouring mind;
Powerless to speak. I scarce uplift my eyes,
Nor dare to question; doubts on doubts arise.
Oh deign he, if Ulysses, to remove
These boding thoughts, and what he is, to prove!”
Pleased with her virtuous fears, the king replies:
“Indulge, my son, the cautions of the wise;
Time shall the truth to sure remembrance bring:
This garb of poverty belies the king:
No more. This day our deepest care requires,
Cautious to act what thought mature inspires.
If one man’s blood, though mean, distain our hands,
The homicide retreats to foreign lands;
By us, in heaps the illustrious peerage falls,
The important deed our whole attention calls.”

“Be that thy care (Telemachus replies)
The world conspires to speak Ulysses wise;
For wisdom all is thine! lo, I obey,
And dauntless follow where you led the way;
Nor shalt thou in the day of danger find
Thy coward son degenerate lag behind.”

“Then instant to the bath (the monarch cries),
Bid the gay youth and sprightly virgins rise,
Thence all descend in pomp and proud array,
And bid the dome resound the mirthful lay;
While the sweet lyrist airs of rapture sings,
And forms the dance responsive to the strings,
That hence the eluded passengers may say,
‘Lo! the queen weds! we hear the spousal lay!’
The suitor’s death, unknown, till we remove
Far from the court, and act inspired by Jove.”

Thus spoke the king: the observant train obey,
At once they bathe, and dress in proud array:
The lyrist strikes the string; gay youths advance,
And fair-zoned damsels form the sprightly dance.
The voice, attuned to instrumental sounds,
Ascends the roof, the vaulted roof rebounds;
Not unobserved: the Greeks eluded say,
“Lo! the queen weds, we hear the spousal lay!
Inconstant! to admit the bridal hour.”
Thus they—but nobly chaste she weds no more.

Meanwhile the wearied king the bath ascends;
With faithful cares Eurynome attends,
O’er every limb a shower of fragrance sheds;
Then, dress’d in pomp, magnificent he treads.
The warrior-goddess gives his frame to shine
With majesty enlarged, and grace divine.
Back from his brows in wavy ringlets fly
His thick large locks of hyacinthine dye.
As by some artist to whom Vulcan gives
His heavenly skill, a breathing image lives;
By Pallas taught, he frames the wondrous mould,
And the pale silver glows with fusile gold:
So Pallas his heroic form improves
With bloom divine, and like a god he moves!
More high he treads, and issuing forth in state,
Radiant before his gazing consort sate.
“And, O my queen! (he cries) what power above
Has steel’d that heart, averse to spousal love?
Canst thou, Penelope, when heaven restores
Thy lost Ulysses to his native shores,
Canst thou, O cruel! unconcern’d survey
Thy lost Ulysses, on this signal day?
Haste, Euryclea, and despatchful spread
For me, and me alone, the imperial bed,
My weary nature craves the balm of rest.
But Heaven with adamant has arm’d her breast.”

“Ah no! (she cries) a tender heart I bear,
A foe to pride: no adamant is there;
And now, e’en now it melts! for sure I see
Once more Ulysses my beloved in thee!
Fix’d in my soul, as when he sailed to Troy,
His image dwells: then haste the bed of joy,
Haste, from the bridal bower the bed translate,
Fram’d by his hand, and be it dress’d in state!”

Thus speaks the queen, still dubious, with disguise
Touch’d at her words, the king with warmth replies
“Alas for this! what mortal strength can move
The enormous burden, who but Heaven above?
It mocks the weak attempts of human hands!
But the whole earth must move if Heaven commands
Then hear sure evidence, while we display
Words seal’d with sacred truth and truth obey:
This hand the wonder framed; an olive spread
Full in the court its ever verdant head.
Vast as some mighty column’s bulk, on high
The huge trunk rose, and heaved into the sky;
Around the tree I raised a nuptial bower,
And roof’d defensive of the storm and shower;
The spacious valve, with art inwrought conjoins;
And the fair dome with polished marble shines.
I lopp’d the branchy head: aloft in twain
Sever’d the bole, and smoothed the shining grain;
Then posts, capacious of the frame, I raise,
And bore it, regular, from space to space:
Athwart the frame, at equal distance lie
Thongs of tough hides, that boast a purple dye;
Then polishing the whole, the finished mould
With silver shone, with elephant, and gold.
But if o’erturn’d by rude, ungovern’d hands,
Or still inviolate the olive stands,
’Tis thine, O queen, to say, and now impart,
If fears remain, or doubts distract thy heart.”

While yet he speaks, her powers of life decay;
She sickens, trembles, falls, and faints away.
At length recovering, to his arms she flew,
And strain’d him close, as to his breast she grew.
The tears pour’d down amain, and “O (she cries)
Let not against thy spouse thine anger rise!
O versed in every turn of human art,
Forgive the weakness of a woman’s heart!
The righteous powers, that mortal lot dispose,
Decree us to sustain a length of woes.
And from the flower of life the bliss deny
To bloom together, fade away, and die.
O let me, let me not thine anger move,
That I forbore, thus, thus to speak my love:
Thus in fond kisses, while the transport warms
Pour out my soul and die within thine arms!
I dreaded fraud! Men, faithless men, betray
Our easy faith, and make our sex their prey:
Against the fondness of my heart I strove:
’Twas caution, O my lord! not want of love.
Like me had Helen fear’d, with wanton charms
Ere the fair mischief set two worlds in arms;
Ere Greece rose dreadful in the avenging day;
Thus had she fear’d, she had not gone astray.
But Heaven, averse to Greece, in wrath decreed
That she should wander, and that Greece should bleed:
Blind to the ills that from injustice flow,
She colour’d all our wretched lives with woe.
But why these sorrows when my lord arrives?
I yield, I yield! my own Ulysses lives!
The secrets of the bridal bed are known
To thee, to me, to Actoris alone
(My father’s present in the spousal hour,
The sole attendant on our genial bower).
Since what no eye hath seen thy tongue reveal’d,
Hard and distrustful as I am, I yield.”

Touch’d to the soul, the king with rapture hears,
Hangs round her neck, and speaks his joy in tears.
As to the shipwreck’d mariner, the shores
Delightful rise, when angry Neptune roars:
Then, when the surge in thunder mounts the sky,
And gulf’d in crowds at once the sailors die;
If one, more happy, while the tempest raves,
Outlives the tumult of conflicting waves,
All pale, with ooze deform’d, he views the strand,
And plunging forth with transport grasps the land:
The ravish’d queen with equal rapture glows,
Clasps her loved lord, and to his bosom grows.
Nor had they ended till the morning ray,
But Pallas backward held the rising day,
The wheels of night retarding, to detain
The gay Aurora in the wavy main;
Whose flaming steeds, emerging through the night,
Beam o’er the eastern hills with streaming light.

At length Ulysses with a sigh replies:
“Yet Fate, yet cruel Fate repose denies;
A labour long, and hard, remains behind;
By heaven above, by hell beneath enjoin’d:
For to Tiresias through the eternal gates
Of hell I trode, to learn my future fates.
But end we here—the night demands repose,
Be deck’d the couch! and peace awhile, my woes!”

To whom the queen: “Thy word we shall obey,
And deck the couch; far hence be woes away:
Since the just gods, who tread the starry plains,
Restore thee safe, since my Ulysses reigns.
But what those perils heaven decrees, impart;
Knowledge may grieve, but fear distracts the heart.”

To this the king: “Ah, why must I disclose
A dreadful story of approaching woes?
Why in this hour of transport wound thy ears,
When thou must learn what I must speak with tears?
Heaven, by the Theban ghost, thy spouse decrees,
Torn from thy arms, to sail a length of seas;
From realm to realm, a nation to explore
Who ne’er knew salt, or heard the billows roar,
Nor saw gay vessel storm the surgy plain,
A painted wonder, flying on the main:
An oar my hand must bear; a shepherd eyes
The unknown instrument with strange surprise,
And calls a corn-van; this upon the plain
I fix, and hail the monarch of the main;
Then bathe his altars with the mingled gore
Of victims vow’d, a ram, a bull, a boar;
Thence swift re-sailing to my native shores,
Due victims slay to all the ethereal powers.
Then Heaven decrees, in peace to end my days
And steal myself from life by slow decays!
Unknown to pain, in age resign my breath,
When late stern Neptune points the shaft of death;
To the dark grave retiring as to rest;
My people blessing, by my people bless’d.
Such future scenes the all-righteous powers display
By their dread seer, and such my future day.”

To whom thus firm of soul: “If ripe for death,
And full of days, thou gently yield thy breath;
While Heaven a kind release from ills foreshows,
Triumph, thou happy victor of thy woes?”

But Euryclea, with dispatchful care,
And sage Eurynome, the couch prepare;
Instant they bid the blazing torch display
Around the dome and artificial day;
Then to repose her steps the matron bends,
And to the queen Eurynome descends;
A torch she bears, to light with guiding fires
The royal pair; she guides them, and retires
The instant his fair spouse Ulysses led
To the chaste love-rites of the nuptial bed.

And now the blooming youths and sprightly fair
Cease the gay dance, and to their rest repair;
But in discourse the king and consort lay,
While the soft hours stole unperceived away;
Intent he hears Penelope disclose
A mournful story of domestic woes,
His servants’ insults, his invaded bed,
How his whole flocks and herds exhausted bled,
His generous wines dishonour’d shed in vain,
And the wild riots of the suitor-train.
The king alternate a dire tale relates,
Of wars, of triumphs, and disastrous fates;
All he unfolds; his listening spouse turns pale
With pleasing horror at the dreadful tale;
Sleepless devours each word; and hears how slain
Cicons on Cicons swell the ensanguined plain;
How to the land of Lote unbless’d he sails;
And images the rills and flowery vales!
How dash’d like dogs, his friends the Cyclops tore
(Not unrevenged), and quaff’d the spouting gore;
How the loud storms in prison bound, he sails
From friendly Aeolus with prosperous gales:
Yet fate withstands! a sudden tempest roars,
And whirls him groaning from his native shores:
How on the barbarous Laestrigonian coast,
By savage hands his fleet and friends lie lost;
How scarce himself survived: he paints the bower,
The spells of Circe, and her magic power;
His dreadful journey to the realms beneath,
To seek Tiresias in the vales of death;
How in the doleful mansions lie survey’d
His royal mother, pale Anticlea’s shade;
And friends in battle slain, heroic ghosts!
Then how, unharm’d, he pass’d the Syren-coasts,
The justling rocks where fierce Charybdis raves,
And howling Scylla whirls her thunderous waves,
The cave of death! How his companions slay
The oxen sacred to the god of day.
Till Jove in wrath the rattling tempest guides,
And whelms the offenders in the roaring tides:
How struggling through the surge he reach’d the shores
Of fair Ogygia and Calypso’s bowers;
Where the gay blooming nymph constrain’d his stay,
With sweet, reluctant, amorous delay;
And promised, vainly promised, to bestow
Immortal life, exempt from age and woe:
How saved from storms Phæacia’s coast he trod,
By great Alcinous honour’d as a god,
Who gave him last his country to behold,
With change of raiment, brass, and heaps of gold

He ended, sinking into sleep, and shares
A sweet forgetfulness of all his cares.

Soon as soft slumber eased the toils of day,
Minerva rushes through the aërial way,
And bids Aurora with her golden wheels
Flame from the ocean o’er the eastern hills;
Uprose Ulysses from the genial bed,
And thus with thought mature the monarch said:

“My queen, my consort! through a length of years
We drank the cup of sorrow mix’d with tears;
Thou, for thy lord; while me the immortal powers
Detain’d reluctant from my native shores.
Now, bless’d again by Heaven, the queen display,
And rule our palace with an equal sway.
Be it my care, by loans, or martial toils,
To throng my empty folds with gifts or spoils.
But now I haste to bless Laertes’ eyes
With sight of his Ulysses ere he dies;
The good old man, to wasting woes a prey,
Weeps a sad life in solitude away.
But hear, though wise! This morning shall unfold
The deathful scene, on heroes heroes roll’d.
Thou with thy maids within the palace stay,
From all the scene of tumult far away!”

He spoke, and sheathed in arms incessant flies
To wake his son, and bid his friends arise.
“To arms!” aloud he cries; his friends obey,
With glittering arms their manly limbs array,
And pass the city gate; Ulysses leads the way.
Now flames the rosy dawn, but Pallas shrouds
The latent warriors in a veil of clouds.






Cyllenius now to Pluto’s dreary reign
Conveys the dead, a lamentable train!
The golden wand, that causes sleep to fly,
Or in soft slumber seals the wakeful eye,
That drives the ghosts to realms of night or day,
Points out the long uncomfortable way.
Trembling the spectres glide, and plaintive vent
Thin, hollow screams, along the deep descent.
As in the cavern of some rifted den,
Where flock nocturnal bats, and birds obscene;
Cluster’d they hang, till at some sudden shock
They move, and murmurs run through all the rock!
So cowering fled the sable heaps of ghosts,
And such a scream fill’d all the dismal coasts.
And now they reach’d the earth’s remotest ends,
And now the gates where evening Sol descends,
And Leucas’ rock, and Ocean’s utmost streams,
And now pervade the dusky land of dreams,
And rest at last, where souls unbodied dwell
In ever-flowing meads of asphodel.
The empty forms of men inhabit there,
Impassive semblance, images of air!
Naught else are all that shined on earth before:
Ajax and great Achilles are no more!
Yet still a master ghost, the rest he awed,
The rest adored him, towering as he trod;
Still at his side is Nestor’s son survey’d,
And loved Patroclus still attends his shade.

New as they were to that infernal shore,
The suitors stopp’d, and gazed the hero o’er.
When, moving slow, the regal form they view’d
Of great Atrides: him in pomp pursued
And solemn sadness through the gloom of hell,
The train of those who by AEgysthus fell:

“O mighty chief! (Pelides thus began)
Honour’d by Jove above the lot of man!
King of a hundred kings! to whom resign’d
The strongest, bravest, greatest of mankind
Comest thou the first, to view this dreary state?
And was the noblest, the first mark of Fate,
Condemn’d to pay the great arrear so soon,
The lot, which all lament, and none can shun!
Oh! better hadst thou sunk in Trojan ground,
With all thy full-blown honours cover’d round;
Then grateful Greece with streaming eyes might raise
Historic marbles to record thy praise:
Thy praise eternal on the faithful stone
Had with transmissive glories graced thy son.
But heavier fates were destined to attend:
What man is happy, till he knows his end?”

“O son of Peleus! greater than mankind!
(Thus Agamemnon’s kingly shade rejoin’d)
Thrice happy thou, to press the martial plain
’Midst heaps of heroes in thy quarrel slain:
In clouds of smoke raised by the noble fray,
Great and terrific e’en in death you lay,
And deluges of blood flow’d round you every way.
Nor ceased the strife till Jove himself opposed,
And all in Tempests the dire evening closed.
Then to the fleet we bore thy honour’d load,
And decent on the funeral bed bestow’d;
Then unguents sweet and tepid streams we shed;
Tears flow’d from every eye, and o’er the dead
Each clipp’d the curling honours of his head.
Struck at the news, thy azure mother came,
The sea-green sisters waited on the dame:
A voice of loud lament through all the main
Was heard; and terror seized the Grecian train:
Back to their ships the frighted host had fled;
But Nestor spoke, they listen’d and obey’d
(From old experience Nestor’s counsel springs,
And long vicissitudes of human things):
‘Forbear your flight: fair Thetis from the main
To mourn Achilles leads her azure train.’
Around thee stand the daughters of the deep,
Robe thee in heavenly vests, and round thee weep:
Round thee, the Muses, with alternate strain,
In ever-consecrating verse, complain.
Each warlike Greek the moving music hears,
And iron-hearted heroes melt in tears.
Till seventeen nights and seventeen days return’d
All that was mortal or immortal mourn’d,
To flames we gave thee, the succeeding day,
And fatted sheep and sable oxen slay;
With oils and honey blazed the augmented fires,
And, like a god adorn’d, thy earthly part expires.
Unnumber’d warriors round the burning pile
Urge the fleet coursers or the racer’s toil;
Thick clouds of dust o’er all the circle rise,
And the mix’d clamour thunders in the skies.
Soon as absorb’d in all-embracing flame
Sunk what was mortal of thy mighty name,
We then collect thy snowy bones, and place
With wines and unguents in a golden vase
(The vase to Thetis Bacchus gave of old,
And Vulcan’s art enrich’d the sculptured gold).
There, we thy relics, great Achilles! blend
With dear Patroclus, thy departed friend:
In the same urn a separate space contains
Thy next beloved, Antilochus’ remains.
Now all the sons of warlike Greece surround
Thy destined tomb and cast a mighty mound;
High on the shore the growing hill we raise,
That wide the extended Hellespont surveys;
Where all, from age to age, who pass the coast,
May point Achilles’ tomb, and hail the mighty ghost.
Thetis herself to all our peers proclaims
Heroic prizes and exequial games;
The gods assented; and around thee lay
Rich spoils and gifts that blazed against the day.
Oft have I seen with solemn funeral games
Heroes and kings committed to the flames;
But strength of youth, or valour of the brave,
With nobler contest ne’er renown’d a grave.
Such were the games by azure Thetis given,
And such thy honours, O beloved of Heaven!
Dear to mankind thy fame survives, nor fades
Its bloom eternal in the Stygian shades.
But what to me avail my honours gone,
Successful toils, and battles bravely won?
Doom’d by stern Jove at home to end my life,
By cursed Ægysthus, and a faithless wife!”
Thus they: while Hermes o’er the dreary plain
Led the sad numbers by Ulysses slain.
On each majestic form they cast a view,
And timorous pass’d, and awfully withdrew.
But Agamemnon, through the gloomy shade,
His ancient host Amphimedon survey’d:
“Son of Melanthius! (he began) O say!
What cause compell’d so many, and so gay,
To tread the downward, melancholy way?
Say, could one city yield a troop so fair?
Were all these partners of one native air?
Or did the rage of stormy Neptune sweep
Your lives at once, and whelm beneath the deep?
Did nightly thieves, or pirates’ cruel bands,
Drench with your blood your pillaged country’s sands?
Or well-defending some beleaguer’d wall,
Say,—for the public did ye greatly fall?
Inform thy guest: for such I was of yore
When our triumphant navies touch’d your shore;
Forced a long month the wintry seas to bear,
To move the great Ulysses to the war.”

“O king of men! I faithful shall relate
(Replied Amphimedon) our hapless fate.
Ulysses absent, our ambitious aim
With rival loves pursued his royal dame;
Her coy reserve, and prudence mix’d with pride,
Our common suit nor granted, nor denied;
But close with inward hate our deaths design’d;
Versed in all arts of wily womankind.
Her hand, laborious, in delusion spread
A spacious loom, and mix’d the various thread.
‘Ye peers (she cried) who press to gain my heart,
Where dead Ulysses claims no more a part,
Yet a short space your rival suit suspend,
Till this funereal web my labours end:
Cease, till to good Laertes I bequeath
A task of grief, his ornaments of death:
Lest when the Fates his royal ashes claim,
The Grecian matrons taint my spotless fame;
Should he, long honour’d with supreme command,
Want the last duties of a daughter’s hand.’

“The fiction pleased, our generous train complies,
Nor fraud mistrusts in virtue’s fair disguise.
The work she plied, but studious of delay,
Each following night reversed the toils of day.
Unheard, unseen, three years her arts prevail;
The fourth, her maid reveal’d the amazing tale,
And show’d as unperceived we took our stand,
The backward labours of her faithless hand.
Forced she completes it; and before us lay
The mingled web, whose gold and silver ray
Display’d the radiance of the night and day.

“Just as she finished her illustrious toil,
Ill fortune led Ulysses to our isle.
Far in a lonely nook, beside the sea,
At an old swineherd’s rural lodge he lay:
Thither his son from sandy Pyle repairs,
And speedy lands, and secretly confers.
They plan our future ruin, and resort
Confederate to the city and the court.
First came the son; the father next succeeds,
Clad like a beggar, whom Eumaeus leads;
Propp’d on a staff, deform’d with age and care,
And hung with rags that flutter’d in the air.
Who could Ulysses in that form behold?
Scorn’d by the young, forgotten by the old,
Ill-used by all! to every wrong resigned,
Patient he suffered with a constant mind.
But when, arising in his wrath to obey
The will of Jove, he gave the vengeance way:
The scattered arms that hung around the dome
Careful he treasured in a private room;
Then to her suitors bade his queen propose
The archer’s strife, the source of future woes,
And omen of our death! In vain we drew
The twanging string, and tried the stubborn yew:
To none it yields but great Ulysses’ hands;
In vain we threat; Telemachus commands:
The bow he snatch’d, and in an instant bent;
Through every ring the victor arrow went.
Fierce on the threshold then in arms he stood;
Poured forth the darts that thirsted for our blood,
And frown’d before us, dreadful as a god!
First bleeds Antinous: thick the shafts resound,
And heaps on heaps the wretches strew the ground;
This way, and that, we turn, we fly, we fall;
Some god assisted, and unmann’d us all;
Ignoble cries precede the dying groans;
And battered brains and blood besmear the stones.

“Thus, great Atrides, thus Ulysses drove
The shades thou seest from yon fair realms above;
Our mangled bodies now deformed with gore,
Cold and neglected, spread the marble floor.
No friend to bathe our wounds, or tears to shed
O’er the pale corse! the honours of the dead.”

“Oh bless’d Ulysses! (thus the king express’d
His sudden rapture) in thy consort bless’d!
Not more thy wisdom than her virtue shined;
Not more thy patience than her constant mind.
Icarius’ daughter, glory of the past,
And model to the future age, shall last:
The gods, to honour her fair fame, shall rise
(Their great reward) a poet in her praise.
Not such, O Tyndarus! thy daughter’s deed,
By whose dire hand her king and husband bled;
Her shall the Muse to infamy prolong,
Example dread, and theme of tragic song!
The general sex shall suffer in her shame,
And e’en the best that bears a woman’s name.”

Thus in the regions of eternal shade
Conferr’d the mournful phantoms of the dead;
While from the town, Ulysses and his band
Pass’d to Laertes’ cultivated land.
The ground himself had purchased with his pain,
And labour made the rugged soil a plain,
There stood his mansion of the rural sort,
With useful buildings round the lowly court;
Where the few servants that divide his care
Took their laborious rest, and homely fare;
And one Sicilian matron, old and sage,
With constant duty tends his drooping age.

Here now arriving, to his rustic band
And martial son, Ulysses gave command:
“Enter the house, and of the bristly swine
Select the largest to the powers divine.
Alone, and unattended, let me try
If yet I share the old man’s memory:
If those dim eyes can yet Ulysses know
(Their light and dearest object long ago),
Now changed with time, with absence and with woe.”
Then to his train he gives his spear and shield;
The house they enter; and he seeks the field,
Through rows of shade, with various fruitage crown’d,
And labour’d scenes of richest verdure round.
Nor aged Dolius; nor his sons, were there,
Nor servants, absent on another care;
To search the woods for sets of flowery thorn,
Their orchard bounds to strengthen and adorn.

But all alone the hoary king he found;
His habit course, but warmly wrapp’d around;
His head, that bow’d with many a pensive care,
Fenced with a double cap of goatskin hair:
His buskins old, in former service torn,
But swell repair’d; and gloves against the thorn.
In this array the kingly gardener stood,
And clear’d a plant, encumber’d with its wood.

Beneath a neighbouring tree, the chief divine
Gazed o’er his sire, retracing every line,
The ruins of himself, now worn away
With age, yet still majestic in decay!
Sudden his eyes released their watery store;
The much-enduring man could bear no more.
Doubtful he stood, if instant to embrace
His aged limbs, to kiss his reverend face,
With eager transport to disclose the whole,
And pour at once the torrent of his soul.—
Not so: his judgment takes the winding way
Of question distant, and of soft essay;
More gentle methods on weak age employs:
And moves the sorrows to enhance the joys.
Then, to his sire with beating heart he moves,
And with a tender pleasantry reproves;
Who digging round the plant still hangs his bead,
Nor aught remits the work, while thus he said:

“Great is thy skill, O father! great thy toil,
Thy careful hand is stamp’d on all the soil,
Thy squadron’d vineyards well thy art declare,
The olive green, blue fig, and pendent pear;
And not one empty spot escapes thy care.
On every plant and tree thy cares are shown,
Nothing neglected, but thyself alone.
Forgive me, father, if this fault I blame;
Age so advanced, may some indulgence claim.
Not for thy sloth, I deem thy lord unkind:
Nor speaks thy form a mean or servile mind;
I read a monarch in that princely air,
The same thy aspect, if the same thy care;
Soft sleep, fair garments, and the joys of wine,
These are the rights of age, and should be thine.
Who then thy master, say? and whose the land
So dress’d and managed by thy skilful hand?
But chief, oh tell me! (what I question most)
Is this the far-famed Ithacensian coast?
For so reported the first man I view’d
(Some surly islander, of manners rude),
Nor farther conference vouchsafed to stay;
Heedless he whistled, and pursued his way.
But thou whom years have taught to understand,
Humanely hear, and answer my demand:
A friend I seek, a wise one and a brave:
Say, lives he yet, or moulders in the grave?
Time was (my fortunes then were at the best)
When at my house I lodged this foreign guest;
He said, from Ithaca’s fair isle he came,
And old Laertes was his father’s name.
To him, whatever to a guest is owed
I paid, and hospitable gifts bestow’d:
To him seven talents of pure ore I told,
Twelve cloaks, twelve vests, twelve tunics stiff with gold:
A bowl, that rich with polish’d silver flames,
And skill’d in female works, four lovely dames.”

At this the father, with a father’s fears
(His venerable eyes bedimm’d with tears):
“This is the land; but ah! thy gifts are lost,
For godless men, and rude possess the coast:
Sunk is the glory of this once-famed shore!
Thy ancient friend, O stranger, is no more!
Full recompense thy bounty else had borne:
For every good man yields a just return:
So civil rights demand; and who begins
The track of friendship, not pursuing, sins.
But tell me, stranger, be the truth confess’d,
What years have circled since thou saw’st that guest?
That hapless guest, alas! for ever gone!
Wretch that he was! and that I am! my son!
If ever man to misery was born,
’Twas his to suffer, and ’tis mine to mourn!
Far from his friends, and from his native reign,
He lies a prey to monsters of the main;
Or savage beasts his mangled relics tear,
Or screaming vultures scatter through the air:
Nor could his mother funeral unguents shed;
Nor wail’d his father o’er the untimely dead:
Nor his sad consort, on the mournful bier,
Seal’d his cold eyes, or dropp’d a tender tear!

“But, tell me who thou art? and what thy race?
Thy town, thy parents, and thy native place?
Or, if a merchant in pursuit of gain,
What port received thy vessel from the main?
Or comest thou single, or attend thy train?”

Then thus the son: “From Alybas I came,
My palace there; Eperitus my name
Not vulgar born: from Aphidas, the king
Of Polyphemon’s royal line, I spring.
Some adverse demon from Sicania bore
Our wandering course, and drove us on your shore;
Far from the town, an unfrequented bay
Relieved our wearied vessel from the sea.
Five years have circled since these eyes pursued
Ulysses parting through the sable flood:
Prosperous he sail’d, with dexter auguries,
And all the wing’d good omens of the skies.
Well hoped we then to meet on this fair shore,
Whom Heaven, alas! decreed to meet no more.”

Quick through the father’s heart these accents ran;
Grief seized at once, and wrapp’d up all the man:
Deep from his soul he sigh’d, and sorrowing spread
A cloud of ashes on his hoary head.
Trembling with agonies of strong delight
Stood the great son, heart-wounded with the sight:
He ran, he seized him with a strict embrace,
With thousand kisses wander’d o’er his face:
“I, I am he; O father, rise! behold
Thy son, with twenty winters now grown old;
Thy son, so long desired, so long detain’d,
Restored, and breathing in his native land:
These floods of sorrow, O my sire, restrain!
The vengeance is complete; the suitor train,
Stretch’d in our palace, by these hands lie slain.”

Amazed, Laertes: “Give some certain sign
(If such thou art) to manifest thee mine.”

“Lo here the wound (he cries) received of yore,
The scar indented by the tusky boar,
When, by thyself, and by Anticlea sent,
To old Autolycus’ realms I went.
Yet by another sign thy offspring know;
The several trees you gave me long ago,
While yet a child, these fields I loved to trace,
And trod thy footsteps with unequal pace;
To every plant in order as we came,
Well-pleased, you told its nature and its name,
Whate’er my childish fancy ask’d, bestow’d:
Twelve pear-trees, bowing with their pendent load,
And ten, that red with blushing apples glow’d;
Full fifty purple figs; and many a row
Of various vines that then began to blow,
A future vintage! when the Hours produce
Their latent buds, and Sol exalts the juice.”

Smit with the signs which all his doubts explain,
His heart within him melts; his knees sustain
Their feeble weight no more: his arms alone
Support him, round the loved Ulysses thrown;
He faints, he sinks, with mighty joys oppress’d:
Ulysses clasps him to his eager breast.
Soon as returning life regains its seat,
And his breath lengthens, and his pulses beat:
“Yes, I believe (he cries) almighty Jove!
Heaven rules us yet, and gods there are above.
’Tis so—the suitors for their wrongs have paid—
But what shall guard us, if the town invade?
If, while the news through every city flies,
All Ithaca and Cephalenia rise?”
To this Ulysses: “As the gods shall please
Be all the rest: and set thy soul at ease.
Haste to the cottage by this orchard’s side,
And take the banquet which our cares provide;
There wait thy faithful band of rural friends,
And there the young Telemachus attends.”

Thus, having said, they traced the garden o’er
And stooping entered at the lowly door.
The swains and young Telemachus they found.
The victim portion’d and the goblet crown’d.
The hoary king, his old Sicilian maid
Perfum’d and wash’d, and gorgeously arrayed.
Pallas attending gives his frame to shine
With awful port, and majesty divine;
His gazing son admires the godlike grace,
And air celestial dawning o’er his face.
“What god (he cried) my father’s form improves!
How high he treads and how enlarged he moves!”

“Oh! would to all the deathless powers on high,
Pallas and Jove, and him who gilds the sky!
(Replied the king elated with his praise)
My strength were still, as once in better days:
When the bold Cephalens the leaguer form’d.
And proud Nericus trembled as I storm’d.
Such were I now, not absent from your deed
When the last sun beheld the suitors bleed,
This arm had aided yours, this hand bestrown
Our shores with death, and push’d the slaughter on;
Nor had the sire been separate from the son.”

They communed thus; while homeward bent their way
The swains, fatigued with labours of the day:
Dolius, the first, the venerable man;
And next his sons, a long succeeding train.
For due refection to the bower they came,
Call’d by the careful old Sicilian dame,
Who nursed the children, and now tends the sire,
They see their lord, they gaze, and they admire.
On chairs and beds in order seated round,
They share the gladsome board; the roofs resound,
While thus Ulysses to his ancient friend:
“Forbear your wonder, and the feast attend:
The rites have waited long.” The chief commands
Their love in vain; old Dolius spreads his hands,
Springs to his master with a warm embrace,
And fastens kisses on his hands and face;
Then thus broke out: “O long, O daily mourn’d!
Beyond our hopes, and to our wish return’d!
Conducted sure by Heaven! for Heaven alone
Could work this wonder: welcome to thy own!
And joys and happiness attend thy throne!
Who knows thy bless’d, thy wish’d return? oh say,
To the chaste queen shall we the news convey?
Or hears she, and with blessings loads the day?”

“Dismiss that care, for to the royal bride
Already is it known” (the king replied,
And straight resumed his seat); while round him bows
Each faithful youth, and breathes out ardent vows:
Then all beneath their father take their place,
Rank’d by their ages, and the banquet grace.

Now flying Fame the swift report had spread
Through all the city, of the suitors dead,
In throngs they rise, and to the palace crowd;
Their sighs were many and the tumult loud.
Weeping they bear the mangled heaps of slain;
Inhume the natives in their native plain,
The rest in ships are wafted o’er the main.
Then sad in council all the seniors sate,
Frequent and full, assembled to debate:
Amid the circle first Eupithes rose,
Big was his eye with tears, his heart with woes:
The bold Antinous was his age’s pride,
The first who by Ulysses’ arrow died.
Down his wan cheek the trickling torrent ran,
As mixing words with sighs he thus began:

“Great deeds, O friends! this wondrous man has wrought,
And mighty blessings to his country brought!
With ships he parted, and a numerous train,
Those, and their ships, he buried in the main.
Now he returns, and first essays his hand
In the best blood of all his native land.
Haste, then, and ere to neighbouring Pyle he flies,
Or sacred Elis, to procure supplies;
Arise (or ye for ever fall), arise!
Shame to this age, and all that shall succeed!
If unrevenged your sons and brothers bleed.
Prove that we live, by vengeance on his head,
Or sink at once forgotten with the dead.”
Here ceased he, but indignant tears let fall
Spoke when he ceased: dumb sorrow touch’d them all.
When from the palace to the wondering throng
Sage Medon came, and Phemius came along
(Restless and early sleep’s soft bands they broke);
And Medon first the assembled chiefs bespoke;

“Hear me, ye peers and elders of the land,
Who deem this act the work of mortal hand;
As o’er the heaps of death Ulysses strode,
These eyes, these eyes beheld a present god,
Who now before him, now beside him stood,
Fought as he fought, and mark’d his way with blood:
In vain old Mentor’s form the god belied;
’Twas Heaven that struck, and Heaven was on his side.”

A sudden horror all the assembly shook,
When slowly rising, Halitherses spoke
(Reverend and wise, whose comprehensive view
At once the present and the future knew):
“Me too, ye fathers, hear! from you proceed
The ills ye mourn; your own the guilty deed.
Ye gave your sons, your lawless sons, the rein
(Oft warn’d by Mentor and myself in vain);
An absent hero’s bed they sought to soil,
An absent hero’s wealth they made their spoil;
Immoderate riot, and intemperate lust!
The offence was great, the punishment was just.
Weigh then my counsels in an equal scale,
Nor rush to ruin. Justice will prevail.”

His moderate words some better minds persuade:
They part, and join him: but the number stay’d.
They storm, they shout, with hasty frenzy fired,
And second all Eupithes’ rage inspired.
They case their limbs in brass; to arms they run;
The broad effulgence blazes in the sun.
Before the city, and in ample plain,
They meet: Eupithes heads the frantic train.
Fierce for his son, he breathes his threats in air;
Fate bears them not, and Death attends him there.

This pass’d on earth, while in the realms above
Minerva thus to cloud-compelling Jove!
“May I presume to search thy secret soul?
O Power Supreme, O Ruler of the whole!
Say, hast thou doom’d to this divided state
Or peaceful amity or stern debate?
Declare thy purpose, for thy will is fate.”

“Is not thy thought my own? (the god replies
Who rolls the thunder o’er the vaulted skies;)
Hath not long since thy knowing soul decreed
The chief’s return should make the guilty bleed.
’Tis done, and at thy will the Fates succeed.
Yet hear the issue: Since Ulysses’ hand
Has slain the suitors, Heaven shall bless the land.
None now the kindred of the unjust shall own;
Forgot the slaughter’d brother and the son:
Each future day increase of wealth shall bring,
And o’er the past Oblivion stretch her wing.
Long shall Ulysses in his empire rest,
His people blessing, by his people bless’d.
Let all be peace.”—He said, and gave the nod
That binds the Fates; the sanction of the god
And prompt to execute the eternal will,
Descended Pallas from the Olympian hill.

Now sat Ulysses at the rural feast
The rage of hunger and of thirst repress’d:
To watch the foe a trusty spy he sent:
A son of Dolius on the message went,
Stood in the way, and at a glance beheld
The foe approach, embattled on the field.
With backward step he hastens to the bower,
And tells the news. They arm with all their power.
Four friends alone Ulysses’ cause embrace,
And six were all the sons of Dolius’ race:
Old Dolius too his rusted arms put on;
And, still more old, in arms Laertes shone.
Trembling with warmth, the hoary heroes stand,
And brazen panoply invests the band.
The opening gates at once their war display:
Fierce they rush forth: Ulysses leads the way.
That moment joins them with celestial aid,
In Mentor’s form, the Jove-descended maid:
The suffering hero felt his patient breast
Swell with new joy, and thus his son address’d:

“Behold, Telemachus! (nor fear the sight,)
The brave embattled, the grim front of fight!
The valiant with the valiant must contend.
Shame not the line whence glorious you descend.
Wide o’er the world their martial fame was spread;
Regard thyself, the living and the dead.”

“Thy eyes, great father! on this battle cast,
Shall learn from me Penelope was chaste.”

So spoke Telemachus: the gallant boy
Good old Laertes heard with panting joy.
“And bless’d! thrice bless’d this happy day! (he cries,)
The day that shows me, ere I close my eyes,
A son and grandson of the Arcesian name
Strive for fair virtue, and contest for fame!”

Then thus Minerva in Laertes’ ear:
“Son of Arcesius, reverend warrior, hear!
Jove and Jove’s daughter first implore in prayer,
Then, whirling high, discharge thy lance in air.”
She said, infusing courage with the word.
Jove and Jove’s daughter then the chief implored,
And, whirling high, dismiss’d the lance in air.
Full at Eupithes drove the deathful spear:
The brass-cheek’d helmet opens to the wound;
He falls, earth thunders, and his arms resound.
Before the father and the conquering son
Heaps rush on heaps, they fight, they drop, they run
Now by the sword, and now the javelin, fall
The rebel race, and death had swallow’d all;
But from on high the blue-eyed virgin cried;
Her awful voice detain’d the headlong tide:
“Forbear, ye nations, your mad hands forbear
From mutual slaughter; Peace descends to spare.”
Fear shook the nations: at the voice divine
They drop their javelins, and their rage resign.
All scatter’d round their glittering weapons lie;
Some fall to earth, and some confusedly fly.
With dreadful shouts Ulysses pour’d along,
Swift as an eagle, as an eagle strong.
But Jove’s red arm the burning thunder aims:
Before Minerva shot the livid flames;
Blazing they fell, and at her feet expired;
Then stopped the goddess, trembled and retired.

“Descended from the gods! Ulysses, cease;
Offend not Jove: obey, and give the peace.”

So Pallas spoke: the mandate from above
The king obey’d. The virgin-seed of Jove,
In Mentor’s form, confirm’d the full accord,
And willing nations knew their lawful lord.
